# Aortic stenosis

=== Page 1 ===
Aortic stenosis
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Sep 04, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Etiology  4
Pathophysiology  4
Case history  5
Diagnosis  7
Approach  7
History and exam  13
Risk factors  14
Tests  17
Differentials  21
Criteria  22
Management  24
Approach  24
Treatment algorithm overview  33
Treatment algorithm  36
Primary prevention  47
Secondary prevention  47
Patient discussions  47
Follow up  49
Monitoring  49
Complications  50
Prognosis  50
Guidelines  52
Diagnostic guidelines  52
Treatment guidelines  53
Online resources  55
References  56
Images  66
Disclaimer  70
=== Page 3 ===
Aortic stenosis Overview
Summary
Aortic stenosis is obstruction of blood flow across the aortic valve due to aortic valve fibrosis and
calcification. It is usually preceded by aortic sclerosis, often suspected by the presence of an early-peaking,
systolic ejection murmur, and confirmed by echocardiography.
Following a decades-long subclinical period, presentation typically includes fatigue, decreased exercise
capacity, exertional dyspnea, exertional chest pain (angina), syncope, and heart failure.
Characteristic murmur is systolic, mid-to-late peaking with a crescendo-decrescendo pattern, and radiates to
the carotids.
Doppler echo is essential to the diagnosis and will show a pressure gradient across the stenotic aortic valve.
Treatment of severe aortic stenosis with either a transcatheter or surgical valve prosthesis should be based
primarily on symptoms or reduced ventricular systolic function. Earlier intervention may be considered
if indicated by results of exercise testing, biomarkers, rapid progression, or the presence of very severe
stenosis.
Choice of intervention should be a shared decision-making process, taking account of lifetime risks and
benefits associated with the type of approach (transcatheter versus surgical) and type of valve (mechanical
vs. bioprosthetic).
Following valve replacement, patients are subject to the complications of prosthetic valves.
Definition
Aortic stenosis (AS) is a degenerative, pathologic narrowing of the aortic valve, leading to symptomatic
obstruction of blood flow out of the left ventricle. It is a progressive disease that often follows aortic sclerosis
(defined as aortic valve thickening without flow limitation).
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Aortic stenosis Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
AS is the most common valvular disease in the US and Europe requiring treatment, and is the second
most frequent cause for cardiac surgery. It is largely a disease of older people, present in about 5% of the
population at age 65 years and approximately 12.4% of those ages ≥75 years.[1] [2] In 2021, aortic valve
disorders were the underlying cause of mortality in 15,239 cases in the US. Further, between 2010 and
2018, the incidence rate of AS increased from 13.5 to 17.0 per 1000, respectively.[3] In the UK, an estimated
291,448 people ages ≥55 years were living with symptomatic severe AS in 2019; approximately 92,000
individuals had asymptomatic severe AS.[4]
AS is preceded by aortic sclerosis. Aortic valve sclerosis affects an estimated 1 in 4 people above the age
of 65 years in the US and incidence is increasing with an aging population and more widespread use of
noninvasive imaging.[5]
Patients with bicuspid valves and AS present two decades earlier on average than patients with trileaflet
valves.[6] Congenital bicuspid aortic valves have been reported to affect around 0.9% to 1.36% of the
general population with a 2:1 male:female predominance.[7]
Etiology
Calcification and fibrosis of normal trileaflet valves is the most common cause of AS in adults and accounts
for as many as 80% of cases in the US and Europe.[8] Calcific aortic disease represents a spectrum ranging
from aortic sclerosis (defined as leaflet thickening without obstruction) to severe AS. Risk factors associated
with aortic sclerosis include smoking, hypertension, low-density lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol, elevated C-
reactive protein, and elevated lipoprotein(a).[9] Retrospective studies have shown that high LDL-cholesterol
levels and smoking are associated with progression to AS, but causality has not been confirmed.[10]
Congenitally bicuspid valves account for the majority of the remainder of cases. This is the most common
cause of AS in younger patients.[3] Patients with coarctation of the aorta and Turner syndrome have a higher
incidence of bicuspid valves.
Rheumatic heart disease has historically been an important cause of AS, but due to improvements in
treatment, it is now uncommon in industrialized countries. Rheumatic heart disease remains prevalent in
developing nations.
Other circumstances including connective tissue diseases, radiation therapy, and hyperlipoproteinemia
syndromes can cause AS, but these are unusual consequences of rare conditions.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with abnormal calcium homeostasis, and it has been shown that
AS progresses faster in patients with CKD.[11] [12]
Pathophysiology
Aortic calcification is no longer thought to reflect age-related wear and tear, and is recognized to be an active
process. The valvular endocardium is damaged as the result of abnormal blood flow across the valve (in the
case of a bicuspid valve) or by an unknown trigger (as may be the case for tricuspid valves). Endocardial
injury initiates an inflammatory process similar to atherosclerosis and ultimately leads to leaflet fibrosis and
deposition of calcium on the valve. Fibrosis and calcification occur slowly and are subclinical until the disease
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Aortic stenosis Theory
is fairly advanced. Progressive fibrosis and calcium deposition limit aortic leaflet mobility and eventually
produce stenosis.
Unicuspid and bicuspid valves experience abnormal shear and mechanical stresses from birth. Therefore,
the pathologic processes and resultant stenosis occur earlier than in trileaflet valves.[6][7][13]
Bicuspid and trileaflet aortic valves with severe calcification following surgical excision
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory University Hospital; used with permission
In rheumatic disease, an autoimmune inflammatory reaction is triggered by prior  Streptococcus  infection
that targets the valvular endothelium, leading to inflammation and eventually calcification.
Longstanding pressure overload leads to the development of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). This adaptive
response permits the ventricle to maintain a normal wall stress (afterload) despite the pressure overload
produced by stenosis. As the stenosis worsens, the adaptive mechanism fails and left ventricular wall stress
increases. Systolic function declines as wall stress increases, with resultant systolic heart failure.
LVH is a contributing factor to many of the symptoms seen in AS. The consequence of concentric LVH is a
smaller, less compliant chamber. Thus, left ventricle end-diastolic pressure is increased, especially during
periods of increased cardiac output (e.g., exercise), leading to the sensation of dyspnea and eventually
diastolic heart failure, which typically precedes systolic dysfunction. Furthermore, in LVH, myocardial oxygen
demand is greater due to increased left ventricular mass, while coronary blood flow may be reduced through
a variety of mechanisms. Thus, even patients who lack coronary atherosclerotic disease may develop
symptoms of anginal chest pain.
Case history
Case history #1
A 78-year-old man presents to his primary care physician with 2 months of progressive shortness of
breath on exertion. He first recognized having to catch his breath while gardening and is now unable to
walk up the stairs in his house without stopping. Prior to this, he was healthy and active. On physical
exam there is a loud systolic murmur at the right upper sternal border radiating to the carotids.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Aortic stenosis Theory
THEORY
Other presentations
AS is a progressive disease that presents after a decades-long subclinical period with symptoms of
chest pain, syncope, and heart failure. While the most common complaints are fatigue and dyspnea with
exertion, patients may also note exertional syncope or chest pain that may be identical to that caused by
coronary artery disease. In its later stages, severe AS may present as heart failure. Many cases of AS
are diagnosed during the subclinical phase while a murmur noted on physical exam is being investigated.
Even with severe AS, patients may be asymptomatic, but often have subtle exertional symptoms. A
careful history is important to determine if the patient has altered his or her habits in response to slowly
worsening stenosis.
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
Approach
Clinical evaluation
AS is often diagnosed during the decades-long subclinical phase while a murmur, noted on physical
exam, is being investigated. Even patients with severe AS may be truly asymptomatic, although early
symptoms may be subtle. A careful history is important to determine if the patient has altered his or her
habits in response to slowly worsening stenosis.
Decreased exercise tolerance, shortness of breath on exertion, exertional chest pain (angina), exertional
syncope or near syncope, and heart failure symptoms should prompt consideration of AS.[26] Patients
have an increased risk of gastrointestinal bleeding due to arteriovenous malformations. They are also
more likely to develop chronic gastrointestinal bleeding that is associated with angiodysplasia. This may
be due to turbulent flow across the stenotic valve producing an acquired von Willebrand deficiency (Heyde
syndrome), which resolves with aortic valve replacement.
The physical exam is the most important screening tool for valvular heart disease. A complete cardiac
exam including precordial palpation, auscultation with attention to murmurs and the aortic closure sound,
and evaluation of arterial and venous pulsation is essential in diagnostic work-up for AS.
Murmurs are generally graded on a scale of 1 to 6:
• Grade 1: murmur is faint and heard only with effort
• Grade 2: murmur is faint but easily detected
• Grade 3: murmur is loud
• Grade 4: murmur is very loud and associated with a palpable thrill
• Grade 5: murmur is so loud that it can be heard with only the edge of the stethoscope
• Grade 6: murmur is extremely loud and heard even when the stethoscope is no longer in contact
with the patient.
The typical murmur of AS is a systolic murmur ≥3/6, with a diamond-shaped crescendo-decrescendo
pattern that peaks in midsystole and radiates to the carotid arteries. The murmur is generally loudest at
the right upper sternal border and terminates with S2 and the end of systole. As the severity of stenosis
worsens, the murmur peaks later in systole and may be accompanied by a palpable thrill. The aortic heart
sound (A2) is delayed as the systolic ejection period becomes prolonged. In severe stenosis, paradoxical
splitting of the second heart sound may be noted such that in expiration, the pulmonic sound (P2) is heard
before A2. The intensity of the second heart sound tends to be diminished as the severity of stenosis
increases and leaflet mobility is reduced.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
The systolic crescendo-decrescendo murmur of aortic stenosis
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory University Hospital; used with permission
Uncommon findings include the presence of a holosystolic murmur at the apex (Gallavardin
phenomenon), mimicking the murmur of mitral regurgitation.
A delayed and diminished carotid upstroke (carotid parvus et tardus) may occur with severe AS, although
this finding is often difficult to distinguish in older patients. In these patients, palpation of the brachial
artery may reveal this finding.
ECG
An ECG is indicated in the initial workup of all patients and is abnormal in over 90% of patients with AS,
with the most common abnormality being left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) due to pressure overload.[27]
 Evidence of LVH and absent Q waves helps distinguish AS from other conditions such as aortic
sclerosis with ischemic heart disease. Patients with AS often have conduction disease manifesting as
atrioventricular (AV) block, hemiblock, or bundle branch block.
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
ECG showing changes associated with left ventricular hypertrophy
From the collection of Melanie Everitt MD, Heart Failure & Transplantation Program,
Primary Children's Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT; used with permission
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE)
TTE is the test of choice in the evaluation of suspected AS and for the evaluation of murmurs detected
on physical exam. Doppler TTE can reliably and accurately detect the presence of a pressure gradient
across the aortic valve. It can also assess left ventricle function and the presence of hypertrophy. It is
essential for the diagnosis of AS and for serial evaluation once the diagnosis has been established.[26]
The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) guidelines recommend TTE
when there is:[26]
• An unexplained systolic murmur
• A single second heart sound
• A history of a bicuspid aortic valve
• Symptoms that might be due to AS.
The ACC/AHA also recommend that measurements taken during echocardiography exam should be used
to grade the severity of AS.[26]
Although murmur intensity does not correlate well with the hemodynamic significance of the associated
lesion, grade 3 murmurs are generally thought to reflect more significant lesions and thus warrant further
evaluation with TTE. In practice, most patients with suspected cardiac disease and a murmur on exam
should have an echocardiogram.
In the UK, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends:[28]
• To consider echocardiography if the patient has a murmur and no other signs or symptoms, but
valve disease is suspected based on:
• the nature of the murmur,
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
• family history,
• age (especially >75 years), or
• medical history (e.g., history of atrial fibrillation).
• To arrange echocardiography for any patient with suspected valve disease and:
• signs or symptoms of valve disease (such as peripheral edema, angina, or breathlessness);
• an abnormal ECG; or
• an ejection systolic murmur with reduced second heart sound but no other signs or
symptoms.
• To refer for urgent (within 2 weeks) specialist assessment and echocardiography if valve disease is
suspected, and the patient has:
• A systolic murmur and exertional syncope. If the combination of specialist assessment and
echocardiography is not available, urgent echocardiography alone should be performed.
• A murmur and severe symptoms (such as angina or breathlessness on minimal exertion or at
rest) which are thought to be due to valvular heart disease.
Chest x-ray
In patients with known or suspected valvular heart disease, a chest x-ray is indicated as part of the initial
assessment to assess the presence or absence of pulmonary congestion or other lung pathology.[26]
Further testing
If there are discrepancies between the physical exam and initial noninvasive testing (ECG, TTE, and chest
x-ray), further noninvasive (cardiac computed tomography [CT], cardiac magnetic resonance imaging
[MRI], CT angiography, magnetic resonance angiography [MRA], ECG exercise stress testing, and
dobutamine stress echo) or invasive (transesophageal echocardiography, cardiac catheterization) testing
should be considered, to determine optimal treatment strategy.[26]
Cardiac CT
Cardiac CT allows both qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the calcium burden on the aortic valve.
The ACC/AHA guidelines recommend use of the Agaston aortic valve calcium score, which can
be calculated and used to make the diagnosis of severe AS when echocardiography or invasive
measurements are inconclusive. This is particularly helpful in the evaluation of low-flow low-gradient
AS.[29] [30]
NICE in the UK recommends to consider using cardiac CT to measure aortic valve calcium score if the
severity of symptomatic AS is uncertain.[28]
Cardiac MRI
Cardiac MRI (cMRI) provides detailed, dynamic images of the heart. It allows for analysis of cardiac
function and hemodynamics. cMRI may be useful when trying to distinguish between true valvular
stenosis and subvalvular stenosis related to a subvalvular membrane.
Owing to the complexity of cMRI, the ACC/AHA recommend transthoracic echocardiography as the
preferred test for evaluating AS, but state that cMRI may be a good option if echocardiography fails to
yield quality images.[26]
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
If cMRI shows mid-wall fibrosis in adults with severe AS, NICE in the UK recommends enhanced follow
up (e.g., more frequent reviews) and further assessment (e.g., stress echocardiography) to monitor the
need for intervention.[28]
Late gadolinium enhancement in particular has shown potential for use to be used in AS risk
stratification.[31]
CT angiography (CTA)
CTA uses a thin-section CT acquisition that is timed to coincide with peak arterial or venous
enhancement. The resulting 3-dimensional image allows characterization and reporting of aortic valve
morphology.[29] CTA can also be used to screen for coronary artery disease before valular surgery.[32]
MRA
MRA has been found to produce good reproducibility of aortic annulus dimensions and calcifications
in comparison with cardiac CTA, even in the presence of arrhythmias.[33] MRA may not be suitable;
however, when there is a high-susceptibility artifact, magnetic field incompatible devices, and severe
arrhythmia.[29] MRA exam is also technically more complex, with longer study time and a higher required
degree of patient cooperation, which some patients may find problematic.[29] [34]
ECG exercise stress testing
Symptomatic patients should not have exercise testing and should be referred for valve replacement.[26]
For those without symptoms, symptom-limited exercise testing may provide clinically important
information.[26] [35] A positive stress test shows either decreased exercise tolerance (compared with
normal for age and sex) or a drop in systolic blood pressure of 10mmHg with exercise.[26] Nearly
40% of patients with asymptomatic AS will develop symptoms with exercise testing.[36] Exercise
echocardiography may add additional diagnostic and prognostic information.[26] [37] [38] In a group of
patients with asymptomatic severe AS, a positive exercise stress test was highly predictive of the onset
of symptoms or the need for surgery. At 24 months, only 19% with a positive exercise test remained
symptom-free or without valve replacement compared with 85% of those with a negative test.[39]
Subsequent work found that the development of symptoms on exercise testing was the strongest
predictor for the onset of spontaneous symptoms, especially among patients <70 years old in whom
symptoms of fatigue and breathlessness are more specific than in older patients.[40]
Dobutamine stress echo
The ACC/AHA recommend this test for patients with a low transvalvular gradient and left ventricular
systolic dysfunction (low ejection fraction), in order to identify pseudostenosis and the presence of
contractile reserve (≥20% increase in stroke volume with dobutamine).[26] Patients with pseudostenosis
do not have severe AS and should not be referred for aortic valve replacement. The presence of
contractile reserve suggests a better prognosis and lower perioperative risk with surgical aortic valve
replacement; however, it does not predict outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
NICE in the UK recommends that stress echocardiography be used as part of further assessment to
monitor need for intervention if cardiac MRI shows mid-wall fibrosis in adults with severe AS.[28]
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
TEE provides alternate detailed views of the aortic valve apparatus, and is frequently used in patients
undergoing valve surgery or transcatheter aortic valve replacement.[29]
Transesophageal echocardiogram showing the left ventricle outflow tract (LVOT), the
aorta (Ao), and nearly immobile leaflets (arrows) of a severely stenotic aortic valve
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory University Hospital; used with permission
Cardiac catheterization
Cardiac catheterization is no longer a first-line test for diagnosis of AS. As a diagnostic tool it is used
when echo-Doppler exam is inconclusive or there is a discrepancy between noninvasive findings and the
history and physical exam.[26] In addition, cardiac catheterization can be very helpful when the diagnosis
of low-flow low-gradient aortic valve stenosis is being considered, as it allows measurement of the cardiac
output and hence accurate determination of the aortic valve area and stroke volume. Furthermore,
catheterization remains essential prior to aortic valve replacement for the evaluation of coronary artery
anatomy.
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
exertional dyspnea (common)
• One of the most common presenting symptoms, alongside fatigue.
• Dyspnea occurs at a prevalence of 60%.[27]
fatigue (common)
• One of the most common presenting symptoms together with exertional dyspnea.
chest pain (common)
• Patients frequently develop exertional chest pain (angina). Symptoms may occur even in the absence
of coronary atherosclerotic disease.
• Chest pain occurs at a prevalence of 50%.[27]
exertional syncope (common)
• A classic symptom and may be caused by arrhythmia or postural hypotension related to AS.
• The prevalence of syncope is 40%.[27]
ejection systolic murmur (common)
• A systolic murmur ≥3/6 is present with a crescendo-decrescendo pattern that peaks in midsystole and
radiates to the carotid. The peak moves later in systole as the AS becomes more severe.
• The murmur is loudest at the right upper sternal border.
The systolic crescendo-decrescendo murmur of aortic stenosis
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory University Hospital; used with permission
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
S2 diminished and single (common)
• With progression of AS, the aortic component of the second heart sound becomes soft or absent due
to decreased mobility of the aortic valve leaflets.
• Aortic valve closure is delayed and often coincides with pulmonic valve closure, producing a single
second heart sound.
carotid parvus et tardus (uncommon)
• The carotid upstroke is frequently delayed and diminished in severe AS (parvus et tardus).
• This finding is often absent in older patients with less compliant vasculature. In these circumstances,
palpation of the brachial artery may reveal this finding.
Other diagnostic factors
paradoxically split S2 (uncommon)
• With more severe stenosis, aortic valve closure may become so delayed that it follows pulmonic valve
closure during expiration, producing the paradoxically split S2.
• May be accentuated by left bundle branch block.
Gallavardin phenomenon (uncommon)
• A musical-quality, holosystolic murmur is present at the apex of the heart that occurs in older patients
with calcific AS, which may mimic mitral regurgitation.
bleeding (uncommon)
• Some patients may develop an acquired von Willebrand deficiency that predisposes to bleeding
and is caused by turbulent flow across the stenotic valve.[41] Patients may describe epistaxis or
bruising. They are also more likely to develop chronic gastrointestinal bleeding that is associated with
angiodysplasia.[41]
Risk factors
Strong
age >60 years
• AS typically presents in the seventh or eighth decade for patients with trileaflet valves and two
decades earlier for patients with bicuspid valves.[6]
• Although the prevalence of AS is only 0.2% in adults ages 50 to 59 years, estimates increase to 1.3%
in patients ages 60 to 69 years, and up to 9.8% in patients ages 80 to 89 years.[14] Overall, AS is
present in 2.6% of adults older than 75 years of age.[10]
congenitally bicuspid aortic valve
• Present in the majority of patients younger than 70 years of age who undergo valve replacement for
severe aortic stenosis.[15]
• Unicuspid and bicuspid valves experience abnormal shear and mechanical stresses from birth.
Therefore, the pathologic processes and resultant stenosis occur earlier than in trileaflet valves.[6] [7]
[13]
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
Bicuspid and trileaflet aortic valves with severe calcification following surgical excision
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory University Hospital; used with permission
rheumatic heart disease
• Common cause of AS in developing countries.
• In rheumatic disease, an autoimmune inflammatory reaction is triggered by prior  Streptococcus 
infection that targets the valvular endothelium, leading to inflammation and eventually calcification.
chronic kidney disease
• AS is prevalent in people with chronic kidney disease; progression of AS in these patients is typically
rapid and unpredictable.[12] Aortic valve calcification occurs in up to 55% of dialysis patients ages >65
years.[16] Dialysis patients also have more rapid annual decrease in valve area (0.23 cm² vs. 0.1 cm²)
compared with patients with normal renal function.[12] [16]
Weak
radiation therapy
• AS is a rare complication of mediastinal radiation therapy that presents at least 2 decades following
treatment.[17]
high low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
• Retrospective studies have demonstrated that high LDL-cholesterol levels are associated with AS, and
several small studies have found that statin therapy targeting LDL-cholesterol slows the hemodynamic
progression of AS.[18] However, these findings were not verified in a large prospective study.[19]
Dyslipidemia is significantly associated with an increased risk of developing severe AS.[3][20]
hyperlipoproteinemia
• Familial hypercholesterolemia is a rare genetic disorder that can contribute to early-onset calcification
of the aortic valve and the aortic root.[21]
hypertension
• Hypertension has been associated with an increased risk of valvular heart disease.[22] [23]
Hypertension is significantly associated with an increased risk of developing severe AS.[3][20]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
diabetes
• Diabetes is a strong predictor for the development of severe AS.[3][20]
elevated lipoprotein(a)
• Elevated lipoprotein(a) is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and aortic
stenosis.[9]
family history
• A nationwide study in Sweden found having at least one sibling with AS to be associated with an
increased risk of being diagnosed with AS, indicating a familial aggregation beyond bicuspid aortic
valve alone.[3][24]
obesity
• Higher body mass index (BMI) is associated with an increased risk of developing AS.[3][23][25]
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
ECG
• The ECG is abnormal in over 90% of patients with AS, with the most
common abnormality being left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) due to
pressure overload.[27]
• Evidence of LVH and absent Q waves helps distinguish AS from other
conditions such as aortic sclerosis with ischemic heart disease.
• Patients with AS can often have conduction disease manifesting as
atrioventricular block, hemiblock, or bundle branch block.
ECG showing changes associated with left ventricular hypertrophy
From the collection of Melanie Everitt MD, Heart
Failure & Transplantation Program, Primary Children's
Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT; used with permission
may demonstrate left
ventricular hypertrophy
and absent Q waves,
atrioventricular block,
hemiblock, or bundle
branch block
transthoracic echocardiography (TTE)
• TTE is the test of choice in the evaluation of suspected AS and
for the evaluation of murmurs detected on physical exam. Doppler
TTE can reliably and accurately detect the presence of a pressure
gradient across the aortic valve. It can also assess left ventricle
function and the presence of hypertrophy. It is essential for the
diagnosis of AS and for serial evaluation once the diagnosis has
been established.[26]
• The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
(ACC/AHA) guidelines recommend TTE when there is an
unexplained systolic murmur, a single second heart sound, a history
of a bicuspid aortic valve, or symptoms that might be due to AS.[26]
• The ACC/AHA also recommend that measurements taken during
echocardiography exam should be used to grade the severity of
AS.[26]
• Although murmur intensity does not correlate well with the
hemodynamic significance of the associated lesion, grade 3 murmurs
are generally thought to reflect more significant lesions and thus
warrant further evaluation with TTE. In practice, most patients with
suspected cardiac disease and a murmur on exam should have an
echocardiogram.
• In the UK, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
(NICE) recommends to consider echocardiography if the patient
has a murmur and no other signs or symptoms, but valve disease
elevated aortic pressure
gradient; measurement
of valve area and left
ventricular ejection
function
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
is suspected based on the nature of the murmur, family history,
age (especially >75 years), or medical history (e.g., history of atrial
fibrillation).[28]
• NICE recommends to arrange echocardiography for any patient with
suspected valve disease and signs or symptoms of valve disease
(such as peripheral edema, angina, or breathlessness), an abnormal
ECG, or an ejection systolic murmur with reduced second heart
sound but no other signs or symptoms.[28]
• NICE further recommends to refer for urgent (within 2 weeks)
specialist assessment and echocardiography if valve disease is
suspected, and the patient has a systolic murmur and exertional
syncope, or a murmur and severe symptoms (such as angina or
breathlessness on minimal exertion or at rest) which are thought to
be due to valvular heart disease.[28]
chest x-ray
• In patients with known or suspected valvular heart disease, a
chest x-ray is indicated as part of the initial assessment to assess
the presence or absence of pulmonary congestion or other lung
pathology.[26]
may be normal; may show
pulmonary congestion or
other lung pathology
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
Other tests to consider
Test Result
Cardiac computed tomography (CT)
• Cardiac CT allows both qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the
calcium burden on the aortic valve.
• The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
guidelines recommend use of the Agaston aortic valve calcium
score, which can be calculated and used to make the diagnosis of
severe AS when echocardiography or invasive measurements are
inconclusive. This is particularly helpful in the evaluation of low-flow
low-gradient AS.[29][30]
• In the UK, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
recommends to consider using cardiac CT to measure aortic valve
calcium score if the severity of symptomatic AS is uncertain.[28]
demonstrates stenotic
aortic valve
cardiac MRI
• Cardiac MRI (cMRI) provides detailed, dynamic images of the heart.
It allows for analysis of cardiac function and hemodynamics. cMRI
may be useful when trying to distinguish between true valvular
stenosis and subvalvular stenosis related to a subvalvular membrane.
• Owing to the complexity of cMRI, the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association recommend transthoracic
echocardiography as the preferred test for evaluating AS, but state
that cMRI may be a good option when echocardiography fails to yield
quality images.[29]
• If cMRI shows mid-wall fibrosis in adults with severe AS, the National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence in the UK recommends
enhanced follow up (e.g., more frequent reviews) and further
assessment (e.g., stress echocardiography) to monitor the need for
intervention.[28]
• Late gadolinium enhancement in particular has shown potential for
use in AS risk stratification.[31]
demonstrates stenotic
aortic valve
CT angiography (CTA)
• CT angiography (CTA) uses a thin-section CT acquisition that is
timed to coincide with peak arterial or venous enhancement. The
resulting 3-dimensional image allows characterization and reporting
of aortic valve morphology.[29] CTA can also be used to screen for
coronary artery disease before valular surgery.[32]
demonstrates aortic valve
morphology
magnetic resonance#angiography
• MR angiography (MRA) has been found to produce good
reproducibility of aortic annulus dimensions and calcifications
in comparison with cardiac CTA, even in the presence of
arrhythmias.[33] MRA may not be suitable; however, when there is
a high-susceptibility artifact, magnetic field incompatible devices,
and severe arrhythmia.[29] MRA exam is also technically more
complex, with longer study time and a higher required degree of
patient cooperation, which some patients may find problematic.[29]
[34]
ECG exercise stress testing
• Consider in asymptomatic patients and those with equivocal
symptoms.[26]
• Many experts advocate the use of symptom-limited exercise testing
in asymptomatic patients with severe AS as a means of risk-
asymptomatic patients:
a positive exercise stress
test demonstrates either
decreased exercise
tolerance (compared with
normal for age and sex)
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
stratification for the development of symptoms, and for the need for
surgery.
• Exercise echocardiography may add additional diagnostic and
prognostic information.[37] [38] [26]
• Symptomatic patients should not have exercise testing and should be
referred for valve replacement.[26] 
or a drop in systolic blood
pressure of 10 mmHg with
exercise
dobutamine stress echo
• The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
recommend this test for patients with a low transvalvular gradient and
left ventricular systolic dysfunction (low ejection fraction), in order to
identify pseudostenosis and the presence of contractile reserve.[26]
• Patients with pseudostenosis do not have severe AS and should not
be referred for aortic valve replacement.
• The presence of contractile reserve suggests a better prognosis
and lower perioperative risk with surgical aortic valve replacement;
however, it does not predict outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve
replacement.
• The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence in the UK
recommends that stress echocardiography be used as part of further
assessment to monitor need for intervention if cardiac MRI shows
mid-wall fibrosis in adults with severe AS.[28]
may demonstrate
pseudostenosis and
presence of contractile
reserve (≥20% increase
in stroke volume with
dobutamine)
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
• TEE provides alternate detailed views of the aortic valve apparatus,
and is frequently used in patients undergoing valve surgery or
transcatheter aortic valve replacement.[29]
may show an echo-dense
valve with reduced or
no cusp motion; may
also show otherwise
unexplained left
ventricular hypertrophy
with or without atrial
enlargement
cardiac catheterization
• Catheterization allows for direct measurement of the pressure
gradient. The sensitivity and specificity of the test are high.
• Due to the invasive nature, this test is useful for diagnosis when the
echocardiogram is inconclusive or discrepant from other findings.
It can also be useful in the diagnosis of low-flow low-gradient aortic
valve stenosis.
elevated aortic pressure
gradient
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Aortic sclerosis • The murmur of aortic
sclerosis is typically less
intense and nonradiating,
and the S2 is normal and
physiologically split. The
carotid upstroke is not
delayed.
• Signs and symptoms
of heart failure or chest
pain should prompt an
echocardiogram but
cannot by themselves
reliably distinguish the two
conditions.
• Transthoracic Doppler
echo will demonstrate no
significant pressure gradient
(<5 mmHg) across the aortic
valve with aortic sclerosis.
Ischemic heart disease • AS and coronary artery
disease frequently coexist
and it is difficult to determine
their relative contributions
to cardiac complaints when
both are present in the same
patient.
• In practice, for patients with
severe AS and concomitant
coronary artery disease,
both are treated at the time
of surgery.
• In ischemic heart disease,
common ECG findings
include Q waves in
contiguous leads, and the
echocardiogram often shows
segments of the myocardium
with abnormal systolic
thickening or wall motion
abnormalities.
• In isolated AS, Q waves
are absent in the ECG;
regional wall motion
abnormalities are absent on
the echocardiogram; and
coronary arteries are normal
upon cardiac catheterization.
Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM)
• HCM is a heterogeneous
disease that can produce
subvalvular stenosis and a
murmur that is similar to AS.
• Hand gripping and squatting
maneuvers are helpful in
distinguishing HCM from
AS. These maneuvers
do not greatly affect the
intensity of the murmur of
AS; however, hand gripping,
which increases afterload,
will soften the HCM murmur.
Standing up after squatting
will decrease cardiac return
and ventricular preload,
which increases the murmur
of HCM.
• Typical echocardiography
findings include asymmetric
hypertrophy with the septal
wall most prominently
affected. Dynamic
obstruction is observed at
the subvalvular level, and
calcification of the valve is
often absent, especially in
younger patients.[42]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Criteria
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/
AHA) classification of stages of valvular AS (2020)[26]
Stage A: at risk of AS
• Valve anatomy: bicuspid aortic valve or other congenital valve anomaly, or aortic valve sclerosis
• Maximum aortic velocity <2 m/s
• No hemodynamic consequences
• No symptoms
Stage B: Progressive AS
• Valve anatomy of mild-to-moderate leaflet calcification of a bicuspid or trileaflet valve with some
reduction in systolic motion, or rheumatic valve with commissural fusion
• Mild AS: maximum aortic velocity 2.0 to 2.9 m/s or mean pressure gradient <20 mmHg
• Moderate AS: maximum aortic velocity 3.0 to 3.9 m/s or mean pressure gradient 20-39 mmHg
• Hemodynamic consequences: normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF); early left ventricular (LV)
diastolic dysfunction may be present
• No symptoms
Stage C: Asymptomatic severe AS
• Anatomy shows severe leaflet calcification or congenital stenosis with severely reduced leaflet opening
• Maximum aortic velocity ≥4 m/s or mean pressure gradient ≥40 mmHg
• Valve area typically ≤1.0 cm² (or indexed valve area ≤0.6 cm²/m²)
• Very severe AS: maximum aortic velocity ≥5 m/s or mean pressure gradient ≥60 mmHg
• Hemodynamic consequences:
• Stage C1: mild LV diastolic dysfunction, mild left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), normal LVEF
• Stage C2: LVEF <50%
• No symptoms
• Exercise testing is reasonable to confirm lack of symptoms in stage C1 AS
Stage D: Symptomatic severe AS
• Stage D1: Symptomatic severe high-gradient AS
• Anatomy: severe leaflet calcification or congenital stenosis with severely reduced leaflet opening
• Maximum aortic velocity ≥4 m/s or mean pressure gradient ≥40 mmHg
• Valve area typically ≤1.0 cm² (or indexed valve area ≤0.6 cm²/m²), but may be larger with mixed
AS/aortic regurgitation
• Hemodynamic consequences: LV diastolic dysfunction and LVH; pulmonary hypertension may
be present
• Symptoms of exertional dyspnea or decreased exercise tolerance, exertional angina, exertional
syncope or presyncope
• Stage D2: Symptomatic severe low-flow/low-gradient AS with reduced LVEF
• Anatomy: severe leaflet calcification/fibrosis with severely reduced leaflet motion
• Valve area ≤1.0 cm² with resting maximum aortic velocity <4 m/s or mean pressure gradient <40
mmHg
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Aortic stenosis Diagnosis
• Dobutamine stress echo shows valve area ≤1.0 cm² with maximum aortic velocity ≥4 m/s at any
flow rate
• Hemodynamic consequences: LV diastolic dysfunction, LVH, and LVEF <50%
• Symptoms of heart failure, angina, syncope, or presyncope
• Stage D3: Symptomatic severe low-gradient AS with normal LVEF or paradoxical low-flow severe AS
• Anatomy: severe leaflet calcification with severely reduced leaflet motion
• Valve area ≤1.0 cm² (indexed valve area ≤0.6 cm²/m²) with maximum aortic velocity <4 m/s
or mean pressure gradient <40 mmHg AND stroke volume index <35 mL/m² measured when
patient is normotensive (systolic blood pressure <140 mmHg)
• Hemodynamic consequences: increased LV wall thickness, small LV chamber with low stroke
volume, restrictive diastolic filling, and LVEF ≥50%
• Symptoms of heart failure, angina, syncope, or presyncope
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in the
UK
NICE recommends that severity of valve disease should be defined in line with the British Society of
Echocardiography (BSE) guidelines on the assessment of AS.[28] In general, the BSE advise:[43]
• Maximal velocity is the preferred measure with which to define severity of AS.
• If either the aortic valve maximal velocity (AV Vmax) is ≥4 m/s or the mean aortic valve gradient
is ≥40 mmHg, the patient should usually be considered to have severe AS. However, the BSE
does list exceptions to this statement, such as scenarios where this increased blood flow (e.g.,
tachyarrhythmias or sepsis).
• Very severe AS is defined as an AV Vmax ≥5 m/s or a mean gradient ≥60 mmHg.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Approach
Various patient factors will influence the type of therapy recommended, including:
• The presence or absence of symptoms
• Cardiac function and severity of stenosis
• Presence and severity of concomitant coronary artery disease and/or other valvular disease
• Suitability for surgery and assessment of surgical risk.
The primary treatment of symptomatic AS is aortic valve replacement (AVR). AVR:
• Is recommended in symptomatic patients with severe AS, including those with low-flow/low-gradient
severe AS with either a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and persistent severe AS on
low-dose dobutamine stress study, or a normal LVEF and evidence that valve obstruction is the most
likely cause of symptoms.[26]
• Is recommended in asymptomatic patients with severe AS who have an LVEF <50% or who are
undergoing other cardiac surgery.[26]
• May be considered in asymptomatic patients with very severe AS or severe AS with rapid progression,
an abnormal exercise test, or elevated serum B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels.[26]
Symptom onset is a significant milestone and portends a poor prognosis, with an average survival of only 2
to 5 years without valve replacement. Advances in prosthetic-valve design, cardiopulmonary bypass, surgical
technique, and anesthesia have steadily improved outcomes for aortic valve replacement.[26]
In the UK, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends referral to a specialist
for adults with:[28]
• Moderate or severe AS
• Bicuspid aortic valve disease of any severity (including mild disease).
Clinical decisions
Historically, the choice between surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) and transcatheter aortic valve
replacement (TAVR) (also known as transcatheter aortic valve implantation, or TAVI) was mainly based on
surgical risk (i.e., lower risk patients tended toward SAVR and higher risk patients toward TAVR).
Contemporary guidelines (e.g., from the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
[ACC/AHA]) support the concept of matching the “durability of the patient” with the “durability of the
valve.”[26] Evidence suggests that transcatheter valve durability is similar to surgical valve durability.[26]
According to the ACC/AHA guidelines, in patients with severe AS, the choice of intervention (TAVR vs.
SAVR) and the type of valve (mechanical vs. bioprosthetic) should be based primarily on symptoms
or reduced ventricular systolic function; this should be a shared decision-making discussion between
the clinician and the patient, who must consider the lifetime risks and benefits associated with each
approach.[26] Early intervention may be considered in patients with rapid progression AS, very severe
AS, or if indicated by exercise test results or biomarkers.[26]
According to the ACC/AHA guidelines, in general in patients with an indication for aortic valve
replacement:[26]
• SAVR is preferred for patients ages <65 years or with a life expectancy >20 years. This includes
patients with an LVEF <50%.
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
• TAVR is preferred for patients ages >80 years or with a life expectancy <10 years.
• Either TAVR or SAVR may be reasonable for patients ages 65-80 years. In these patients, the
decision of whether to perform SAVR or TAVR should be based on the patient wishes, anatomic
considerations, concomitant coronary artery disease and/or other valvular heart disease,
comorbidities (e.g., frailty, dementia), and surgical risk.
The European Society of Cardiology and the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (ESC/
EACS) strongly recommend early intervention in symptomatic severe AS. The only exceptions are for
those in whom intervention is unlikely to improve quality of life, or those with concomitant conditions
associated with survival <1 year (e.g., malignancy).[46] The ESC/EACS specifically recommend:[46]
• Intervention for all patients with symptomatic AS that is:
• Severe, high-gradient (defined as a mean gradient ≥40 mmHg, peak velocity ≥4.0 m/s, and
valve area ≤1.0 cm²)
• Severe low-flow (SVi ≤35 mL/m²), low-gradient (<40 mmHg) AS with reduced ejection
fraction (<50%), and evidence of flow (contractile) reserve.
• Intervention should be considered for patients with low-flow, low-gradient (<40 mmHg) symptomatic
AS and:
• Normal ejection fraction after careful confirmation that the AS is severe
• Reduced ejection fraction without flow (contractile) reserve, particularly when cardiac
computed tomography (CT) calcium scoring confirms severe AS.
According to the ESC/EACS, in general in patients with an indication for aortic valve replacement:[46]
• SAVR is preferred for patients ages <75 years at low risk for SAVR or unsuitable for transfemoral
TAVR
• TAVR is preferred for patients ages ≥75 years or unsuitable for or at high risk for SAVR.
NICE in the UK recommends intervention for any patient with symptomatic AS.[28] NICE further
recommends to consider referral for intervention, if suitable, if the patient has:[28]
• Asymptomatic severe AS and any of the following:
• Vmax (peak aortic jet velocity) >5 m/s on echocardiography
• Aortic valve area <0.6 cm² on echocardiography
• LVEF <55%
• B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-terminal proBNP (NT-proBNP) level more than twice
the upper limit of normal
• Symptoms that are provoked by exercise testing.
• Symptomatic low-gradient AS with LVEF <55% if dobutamine stress echocardiography shows their
AS is severe by:
• A mean gradient across the aortic valve that increases to >40 mmHg and
• An aortic valve area that remains <1 cm².
NICE recommends:[28]
• SAVR preferentially for patients with severe AS if they are suitable for surgery, either by median
sternotomy or minimally invasive surgery if there is an indication for surgery and they are at low or
intermediate surgical risk.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
• NICE recommends basing the decision on the type of surgery (median sternotomy or
minimally invasive surgery) on patient characteristics and preferences. If minimally invasive
surgery is the most suitable option but is not available locally, NICE recommends referring
the patient to another center.[28]
• TAVR for patients with severe AS if surgery is unsuitable, or non-bicuspid severe AS with high
surgical risk, including those with:
• An unacceptably high risk of mortality or morbidity due to surgery (e.g., risk of infection in
patients who are immunosuppressed)
• Who are expected to have unacceptably strenuous and prolonged recovery from surgery
and an extended need for rehabilitation due to frailty, reduced mobility, or musculoskeletal
conditions
• With a low life expectancy, either because of their age, or because they have life-limiting
comorbidities.
NICE also recommends that:[47]
• Suitability for TAVR should be determined by an experienced multidisciplinary team. This team
must include interventional cardiologists who are experienced in the procedure, cardiac surgeons,
an expert in cardiac imaging, and (where appropriate) a cardiac anesthetist and a geriatrician.
NICE advises that suitability for TAVR depends on:[28]
• An appropriate access for inserting the TAVR catheter
• The morphology of the valve, aortic root, and ascending aorta
• The degree and distribution of calcium in the aortic valve.
• Details of all patients should be entered into the UK TAVR registry.[47]
• TAVR should only be performed in specialised centers and only by clinicians and teams who have
specialised training in complex endovascular interventions. It is recommended that units doing this
procedure should have both cardiac and vascular support in order to manage complications in an
emergency, and ongoing patient care.[47]
If the patient has an indication for intervention, NICE recommends discussing the possible benefits and
risks with the patient; include in this discussion:[28]
• The long and short term benefits to quality of life
• Prosthetic valve durability
• The risks associated with the procedures
• The type of access required for surgery (median sternotomy, minimally invasive surgery, or
transcatheter [for patients at high surgical risk])
• The possible need for other cardiac procedures in future.
Assessment of surgical risk
The decision to refer patients for SAVR or TAVR depends in part on their estimated risk of operative
mortality. Surgical risk can be estimated using scoring systems such as the Society of Thoracic Surgeons
Predicted Risk of Mortality (STS-PROM) and the EuroScore II.[46]  [Society of Thoracic Surgeons: risk
calculator] (http://www.sts.org/quality-research-patient-safety/quality/risk-calculator-and-models/risk-
calculator)  These models utilize a variety of risk factors to predict postoperative outcome after valve
surgery. Mortality estimates are used in conjunction with assessments of frailty, major organ system
compromise, and procedure-specific impediments to classify each patient's overall surgical risk:[26]
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
• Low risk
• Intermediate risk
• High risk
• Prohibitive risk
Treatment decisions in elderly and frail patients
Patients with terminal illness, significant dementia, or advanced comorbidities in whom valve replacement
would not be expected to provide a meaningful improvement in life will typically not be referred for valve
replacement.
Bear in mind, however, that NICE in the UK specifically recommends that TAVR may be considered in
patients who have a low life expectancy (either because of their age or because they have life-limiting
comorbidities).[28]
Surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR)
Prosthetic aortic valves used in surgical valve replacement may be mechanical or bioprosthetic. The type
of prosthesis used depends on patient preference, but there has been a trend toward greater utilization of
bioprosthetic valves in recent years.[26] [48] Each type has relative merits and drawbacks.
• Mechanical valves:
• Reasonable for patients less than 50 years of age who do not have a contraindication to
anticoagulation. For patients ages 50 to 65 years and no contraindication to anticoagulation,
it is reasonable to individualize the choice of either a mechanical or bioprosthetic valve on
the basis of individual patient factors and preferences.[26]
• Less prone to degeneration and subsequent reoperation for valve failure compared with
bioprosthetic valves.
• Patients require subsequent systemic anticoagulation (with the associated risk of bleeding) to
prevent valve thrombosis.[26]  Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are not recommended in
patients requiring long-term anticoagulation for a mechanical valve regardless of coexisting
atrial fibrillation.[26]
• Bioprosthetic valves:
• Recommended in patients of any age for whom anticoagulation therapy is contraindicated,
cannot be managed, or is not desired.[26]
• Bioprosthetic valves are also reasonable for patients more than 65 years of age. For patients
ages 50 to 65 years, it is reasonable to individualize the choice of either a mechanical or
bioprosthetic valve on the basis of individual patient factors and preferences.[26]
• More prone to degeneration and subsequent reoperation for valve failure compared with
mechanical valves.
• Patients do not need systemic anticoagulation, except in the presence of atrial fibrillation,
where anticoagulation is indicated.
Outcome data comparing bioprosthetic and mechanical valves are difficult to interpret because
bioprosthetic valve technology has improved significantly since the time of the largest randomized trials.
Studies using first-generation bioprosthetic valves found a trend toward improved survival with mechanical
valves.[49] [50]
In contrast, newer studies have found no differences in mortality after correcting for preoperative severity
of heart disease, regardless of age. They do note that bioprosthetic valves are more likely to require
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
reoperation for valve failure.[51] [52] Overall, there is a trend among surgeons toward greater use of
bioprosthetic valves. From 1997 to 2006, the usage of bioprosthetic valves in North America increased
from 44% to 78.4%.[48] This trend reflects greater confidence in the durability of second- and third-
generation bioprosthetic valves.
Choices regarding aortic valve prosthesis must balance the risk of bleeding due to the need for systemic
anticoagulation with mechanical valves versus the increased possibility of reoperation with biologic
valves.
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR)
In the US and some European countries, the number of TAVR procedures performed annually surpasses
the number of isolated surgical aortic valve replacements.[53] The procedure builds on the current
techniques employed in the cardiac catheterization laboratory for coronary angiography and intervention.
Unlike surgical valve replacement, TAVR is done on the beating heart without the need for a sternotomy
or cardiopulmonary bypass. Instead, catheters are introduced into the heart via several potential arterial
access points, and a stent-mounted prosthetic valve is placed within the native aorta. Several different
transcatheter heart valves exist, each with a unique delivery system and technique, but the basic
premise remains the same. The advantages of this minimally invasive approach include the avoidance of
cardiopulmonary bypass and median sternotomy. These benefits have allowed invasive cardiologists and
cardiothoracic surgeons to offer aortic valve replacement to sicker and more complex patients.
TAVR in high-risk patients
In the PARTNER study comparing surgery and TAVR in high-risk patients, mortality and symptom
reduction were similar at 2 and 5 years for each modality.[54] [55] Periprocedural risks varied at 30 days;
vascular complications and neurologic events such as stroke occurred more frequently after TAVR in early
experiences using first and second generation devices that required very large sheath delivery system
sizes, while major bleeding and new-onset atrial fibrillation more commonly followed surgery.[56] [57]
 Acute kidney injury and new pacemaker implantation were complications of both interventions at similar
rates.[56] Scores on health-related quality-of-life assessments improved more rapidly with TAVR but were
similar at 12 months.[58] At 2 and 5 years, echocardiographic improvements in valve area and mean
gradients were similar in both groups, but total and paravalvular aortic regurgitation was encountered
more frequently after TAVR.[54] [55] [59] A randomized trial comparing TAVR using an alternative, self-
expanding bioprosthesis to surgery in high-risk patients demonstrated similar survival at 5 years with
TAVR compared with surgery.[60] It must be emphasized that, despite the encouraging results, TAVR
is a relatively new technology and it is unclear at this time how the durability of transcatheter valves will
compare with surgical prostheses.
For patients with prohibitive surgical risk (i.e., surgical noncandidates), TAVR is the preferred treatment
modality.[61] The PARTNER trial comparing standard therapy, including balloon aortic valvuloplasty,
with TAVR in inoperable patients demonstrated a 20% absolute reduction in mortality at 1 year in favor
of TAVR.[62] At 3 years, mortality with TAVR was 54.1% compared with 80.9% with standard therapy,
while at 5 years, mortality was 71.8% and 93.6%, respectively.[63] [64] Heart failure symptoms improved
between 30 days and 6 months. At 3 years, 29.7% of patients in the TAVR group were alive with New
York Heart Association Class I/II symptoms, compared with 4.8% of patients in the standard therapy
group.[62] [63] [65] Patients treated with TAVR also showed significant improvements on assessments of
health-related quality of life when compared with those receiving standard therapy.[66]
TAVR in intermediate- and low-risk patients
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
Clinical trial data in intermediate-risk and low-risk patients suggest that TAVR is a reasonable alternative
to surgery.
The PARTNER 2A study in intermediate-risk patients with severe AS demonstrated similar rates of
death or disabling stroke at 2 years and 5 years with TAVR compared with surgery, while an alternate
randomized trial of a self-expanding prosthesis also showed noninferiority at 2 years with TAVR.[67] [68]
[69] In patients undergoing TAVR implantation via a transfemoral approach rather than a transthoracic
one, there was a trend toward a lower risk of death or disabling stroke compared with surgery. A meta-
analysis that included the PARTNER 2A study (2 year results) found that transfemoral TAVR may be
beneficial compared with surgical aortic valve replacement in many patients, particularly those who have
a shorter life expectancy.[70]
In low-risk patients with anatomy favorable for transfemoral TAVR, the PARTNER 3 study showed that
TAVR outperformed surgery at reducing a composite of death, stroke, or rehospitalization at 1 year,
while a second study of TAVR in low-risk patients using an alternative self-expanding prosthesis showed
similar rates of a composite of death or disabling stroke between TAVR and surgery.[71] [72] Of note,
the average age of patients in the two pivotal TAVR low-risk trials was >70 years. Therefore, data from
these trials should not be extrapolated to patients at considerably younger ages. A Cochrane review
found that there is probably little or no mortality difference between TAVR and surgery for severe AS in
low-risk patients, and probably little or no difference in risk of stroke, myocardial infarction, and cardiac
death.[73]  The Cochrane review found that TAVR reduces the risk of atrial fibrillation, acute kidney injury,
and bleeding, and may reduce the risk of hospitalization, but there is an increased risk of permanent
pacemaker implantation. It should be noted that further study is needed to determine the long-term
durability of transcatheter valves, and longer-term follow-up data from these trials in low-risk patients will
permit a more complete evaluation of specific outcomes such as survival and complication rates.
Balloon aortic valvuloplasty
For patients with severe AS who are critically ill, need urgent noncardiac surgery, have cancer and an
unclear long-term survival, are acutely symptomatic, or are in cardiogenic shock, balloon valvuloplasty is
a reasonable option as a bridge to recovery and subsequent evaluation for SAVR or TAVR.[26] Balloon
valvuloplasty may also be used in patients with decompensated AS and in those with severe AS who
require urgent high-risk noncardiac surgery.[46] This is a percutaneous procedure done in the cardiac
catheterization lab in which a balloon is forcefully inflated across the aortic valve to relieve stenosis.
Unfortunately, restenosis rates are high at 6 months and there is no shown improvement in mortality
following valvuloplasty. However, patients do generally experience improvement in hemodynamics and
symptoms, which may provide an opportunity for more definitive care.[74]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Balloon valvuloplasty fluoroscopy film that demonstrates
valvuloplasty balloon inflated across a calcified aortic valve
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory University Hospital; used with permission
Medical therapy
Medical therapies do not influence the natural history of AS. However, medical therapy for certain
comorbidities, such as hypertension and hyperlipidemia, is appropriate in patients with AS and
hypertension and/or coronary artery disease.[26]
Studies have shown that renin-angiotensin system blocker therapy (ACE inhibitor or angiotensin receptor
blocker) may reduce the long-term risk of all-cause mortality in patients who have undergone SAVR or
TAVR and may be considered in these patients (provided that blood pressure is carefully monitored).[26]
[46]
While the role of statin therapy is established for atherosclerotic disease prevention, randomized trials
of statins in patients with AS have not found improvements in AS progression.[19] [75] [76]  However,
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
studies in patients with mild to moderate AS have shown a reduction of ischemic events by 20% in those
treated with statins.[26]
The ACC/AHA recommends statin therapy for primary and secondary prevention of atherosclerosis in all
patients with calcific AS on the basis of standard risk scores.[26]
NICE in the UK recommends considering aspirin (or clopidogrel if aspirin is not tolerated) if the patient
has undergone TAVR. However, NICE does not recommend anticoagulation following surgical biological
valve replacement, unless there is a separate indication for anticoagulation.[28]
Asymptomatic AS
Severe AS
The ACC/AHA guidelines recommend:[26]
• SAVR in asymptomatic patients with severe AS and an LVEF <50%, who are ages <65 years or
have a life expectancy >20 years.[26]
• Studies have reported significant differences in survival, beginning as early as 3 years post-
valve replacement, between those with preoperative LVEF >50% and patients with LVEF
<50%.[77] Delaying surgery in these patients may lead to irreversible LV dysfunction and
worsened survival. 
• Either TAVR or SAVR in asymptomatic patients with severe AS and an LVEF <50%, who are 65 to
80 years of age and have no contraindications to transfemoral TAVR, after shared decision-making
based on the patient wishes, anatomic considerations, concomitant coronary artery disease and/or
other valvular heart disease, comorbidities (e.g., frailty, dementia), and surgical risk.[26]
• TAVR in preference to SAVR in asymptomatic patients with severe AS and LVEF <50% who are of
any age and have.[26] 
• A life expectancy <10 years and no contraindication to transfemoral TAVR
• A high or prohibitive surgical risk, if the predicted post-TAVR survival is >12 months with an
acceptable quality of life.
• SAVR in preference to TAVR in asymptomatic patients with severe AS and low surgical risk who
have an abnormal exercise test, very severe AS, rapid progression, or elevated serum B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels.[26]
• Considering SAVR in asymptomatic patients with severe AS and normal LV systolic function at rest
and low surgical risk, when there is a progressive decrease in LVEF on at least three serial imaging
studies to <60% without an alternative cause.[26]
There is a sizable population of patients with severe AS who are asymptomatic, with normal LV systolic
function, and not requiring other types of cardiac surgery. The first determination to be made in these
patients is that they are truly without symptoms, using a thorough history focused on activity level and
changes in functional capacity. For those without symptoms, exercise testing may provide clinically
important information.[35] The ACC/AHA recommend that patients with asymptomatic severe AS undergo
serial evaluation with echocardiography every 6 to 12 months.[26] These patients must also be followed
up closely by a cardiologist.
The ESC/EACS recommend:[46]
• Intervention for all asymptomatic patients with severe AS and:
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
• Systolic LV dysfunction (LVEF <50%) without another cause
• Demonstrable symptoms on exercise testing.
• Intervention should be considered for asymptomatic patients with:
• Severe AS and systolic LV dysfunction (LVEF <55%) without another cause
• Severe AS and a sustained fall in BP (>20 mmHg) during exercise testing
• LVEF >55% and a normal exercise test if the procedural risk is low and one of the following
parameters is present:
• Very severe AS (mean gradient ≥60 mmHg or Vmax >5 m/s)
• Severe valve calcification (assessed by cardiac CT) and Vmax progression ≥0.3 m/s/
year
• Markedly elevated BNP levels (>3 age- and sex-corrected normal range) confirmed by
repeated measurements and without other explanation.
NICE in the UK recommends that adults with asymptomatic severe AS have a clinical review every 6 to
12 months (which should include echocardiography) if an intervention is suitable but not currently needed.
NICE advises basing the frequency of review on the echocardiography findings and shared decision
making with the patient.[28]
Moderate or mild AS
The ACC/AHA guidelines recommend:[26]
• When patients with moderately stenotic valves undergo cardiac surgery, the decision to replace
the valve is more difficult and balances the increased risk of adding aortic valve replacement to the
planned surgery with the future likelihood of AS progressing to a severe, symptomatic state. Aortic
valve replacement with either TAVR or SAVR may be considered for asymptomatic patients with
moderate AS who are undergoing other cardiac surgery.[26]
• Prophylactic valve replacement at the time of coronary bypass surgery has been studied, though
no large prospective, randomized controlled trials exist. A review of outcomes from 1995 to 2000
of the Society of Thoracic Surgery (STS) database found that if patients had a peak aortic gradient
>30 mmHg and were <70 years (correlating with a more moderate degree of stenosis), they
benefited from prophylactic valve replacement at the time of coronary artery bypass surgery.[78]
These conclusions were supported by a subsequent retrospective analysis that found a significant
survival advantage at 8 years in favor of prophylactic valve replacement at the time of bypass
surgery for those with moderate but not mild AS.[79]
• Serial transthoracic echocardiograms in asymptomatic patients with mild stenosis is recommended
every 3 to 5 years.[26] People with moderate stenosis are recommended to have transthoracic
echocardiograms every 1 to 2 years.[26]
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Initial ( summary )
clinically unstable
1st medical therapy or balloon valvuloplasty
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute ( summary )
clinically stable: symptomatic
severe AS: age <65 years
or life expectancy >20
years
1st surgical aortic valve replacement
plus long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
adjunct medical therapy
severe AS: age 65-80 years 1st surgical OR transcatheter aortic valve
replacement
plus long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
adjunct medical therapy
severe AS: age >80 years
or life expectancy <10
years or high/prohibitive
risk
1st transcatheter aortic valve replacement
plus long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
adjunct medical therapy
clinically stable: asymptomatic
severe AS: LVEF <50% 1st surgical OR transcatheter aortic valve
replacement
plus long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
adjunct medical therapy
severe AS: abnormal
exercise test, very severe
AS, rapid progression, or
elevated BNP
1st surgical aortic valve replacement
plus long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
adjunct medical therapy
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
Acute ( summary )
severe AS: normal LV
systolic function with
progressive decrease in
LVEF <60%
1st consider surgical aortic valve
replacement
adjunct long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
adjunct medical therapy
nonsevere AS:
undergoing bypass, valve,
or aortic surgery
1st consider concomitant prophylactic valve
replacement
adjunct long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
adjunct medical therapy
nonsevere AS: not
undergoing bypass, valve,
or aortic surgery
1st medical therapy and follow-up
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Initial
clinically unstable
1st medical therapy or balloon valvuloplasty
» The information in this treatment algorithm
is largely based on recommendations from the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association (ACC/AHA). For information on how
recommendations from the UK National Institute
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) and
the European Society of Cardiology/European
Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (ESC/
EATC) differ, see Management Approach .
Follow the recommended approach in your
region.
» All patients need to be stabilized prior
to surgery or transcatheter aortic valve
replacement (TAVR).
» There has been concern that vasodilator
therapy could be potentially dangerous, due
to the possibility that a stenotic valve might
permit only a fixed cardiac output, leading to
hypotension. Vasodilator and beta-blocker
therapy is not routinely given preoperatively on
the day of surgery, although vasodilator therapy
may be helpful for selected patients in closely
monitored settings (e.g., ICU).
» For patients with severe AS who are critically
ill, need urgent noncardiac surgery, have
cancer and an unclear long-term survival, are
acutely symptomatic, or are in cardiogenic
shock, balloon valvuloplasty is a reasonable
option as a bridge to recovery and subsequent
evaluation for surgical aortic valve replacement
(SAVR) or TAVR.[26] This is a percutaneous
procedure done in the cardiac catheterization
lab in which a balloon is forcefully inflated across
the aortic valve to relieve stenosis. Unfortunately,
restenosis rates are high at 6 months and there
is no shown improvement in mortality following
valvuloplasty. However, patients do generally
experience improvement in hemodynamics and
symptoms, which may provide an opportunity for
more definitive care.[74]
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
Initial
Balloon valvuloplasty fluoroscopy film
that demonstrates valvuloplasty balloon
inflated across a calcified aortic valve
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory
University Hospital; used with permission
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
clinically stable: symptomatic
severe AS: age <65 years
or life expectancy >20
years
1st surgical aortic valve replacement
» The ACC/AHA guidelines recommend
surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) for
symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with
severe AS who meet an indication for aortic
valve replacement (AVR) and who are <65 years
of age or have a life expectancy >20 years. This
includes patients with an LVEF <50%.[26]
» Prosthetic aortic valves used in surgical
valve replacement may be mechanical or
bioprosthetic.
» AVR is recommended in symptomatic patients
with severe AS, including those with low-flow/
low-gradient severe AS with either a reduced
left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and
persistent severe AS on low-dose dobutamine
stress study, or a normal LVEF and evidence
that valve obstruction is the most likely cause of
symptoms.[26]
plus long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Antibiotic prophylaxis for the prevention of
infective endocarditis should be considered
in patients with prosthetic cardiac valves,
including transcatheter-implanted prostheses
and homografts, before dental procedures that
involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the
periapical region of teeth or perforation of the
oral mucosa.[26]
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist
is indicated in patients who have had aortic
valve replacement using prosthetic mechanical
valves.[26]
» Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are
not recommended in patients requiring long-
term anticoagulation for a mechanical valve
regardless of coexisting atrial fibrillation.[26]
» Anticoagulation is not required if bioprosthetic
valves are used, except in the presence of atrial
fibrillation, where anticoagulation is indicated.
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
Acute
adjunct medical therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Medical therapy for hypertension and
hyperlipidemia is appropriate in patients with
AS and hypertension and/or coronary artery
disease.[26]
» Statin therapy is indicated for primary and
secondary prevention of atherosclerosis in all
patients with calcific AS on the basis of standard
risk scores.[26]
severe AS: age 65-80 years 1st surgical OR transcatheter aortic valve
replacement
» The ACC/AHA guidelines recommend either
surgery or transfemoral transcatheter aortic
valve replacement (TAVR) for symptomatic
patients with severe AS who are ages 65 to
80 years and have no contraindications to
transfemoral TAVR, after shared decision-
making based on the patient wishes, anatomic
considerations, concomitant coronary artery
disease and/or other valvular heart disease,
comorbidities (e.g., frailty, dementia), and
surgical risk.[26]
plus long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Antibiotic prophylaxis for the prevention of
infective endocarditis should be considered
in patients with prosthetic cardiac valves,
including transcatheter-implanted prostheses
and homografts, before dental procedures that
involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the
periapical region of teeth or perforation of the
oral mucosa.[26]
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist
is indicated in patients who have had aortic
valve replacement using prosthetic mechanical
valves.[26]Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs)
are not recommended in patients requiring long-
term anticoagulation for a mechanical valve
regardless of coexisting atrial fibrillation.[26]
» Anticoagulation is not required if bioprosthetic
valves are used, except in the presence of atrial
fibrillation, where anticoagulation is indicated.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
adjunct medical therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Medical therapy for hypertension and
hyperlipidemia is appropriate in patients with
AS and hypertension and/or coronary artery
disease.[26]
» Statin therapy is indicated for primary and
secondary prevention of atherosclerosis in all
patients with calcific AS on the basis of standard
risk scores.[26]
» In patients who have undergone TAVR, renin-
angiotensin system blocker therapy (ACE
inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker) may be
considered to reduce the long-term risk of all-
cause mortality.[26]
severe AS: age >80 years
or life expectancy <10
years or high/prohibitive
risk
1st transcatheter aortic valve replacement
» The ACC/AHA guidelines recommend
transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR)
in preference to surgery in symptomatic patients
with severe AS who are: ages >80 years, or
for younger patients with a life expectancy <10
years and no contraindication to transfemoral
TAVR; of any age and have a high or prohibitive
surgical risk, if the predicted post-TAVR survival
is >12 months with an acceptable quality of
life.[26]
» Surgical risk can be estimated using scoring
systems such as the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality (STS-
PROM) and the EuroScore II.[46]  [Society
of Thoracic Surgeons: risk calculator] (http://
www.sts.org/quality-research-patient-safety/
quality/risk-calculator-and-models/risk-calculator)
 These models utilize a variety of risk factors
to predict postoperative outcome after valve
surgery. Mortality estimates are used in
conjunction with assessments of frailty, major
organ system compromise, and procedure-
specific impediments to classify each patient’s
overall surgical risk: low risk; intermediate risk;
high risk; prohibitive risk.[26]
plus long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Antibiotic prophylaxis for the prevention of
infective endocarditis should be considered
in patients with prosthetic cardiac valves,
including transcatheter-implanted prostheses
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
Acute
and homografts, before dental procedures that
involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the
periapical region of teeth or perforation of the
oral mucosa.[26]
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Anticoagulation is not required if bioprosthetic
valves are used, except in the presence of atrial
fibrillation, where anticoagulation is indicated.
adjunct medical therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Medical therapy for hypertension and
hyperlipidemia is appropriate in patients with
AS and hypertension and/or coronary artery
disease.[26]
» Statin therapy is indicated for primary and
secondary prevention of atherosclerosis in all
patients with calcific AS on the basis of standard
risk scores.[26]
» In patients who have undergone TAVR, renin-
angiotensin system blocker therapy (ACE
inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker) may be
considered to reduce the long-term risk of all-
cause mortality.[26]
clinically stable: asymptomatic
severe AS: LVEF <50% 1st surgical OR transcatheter aortic valve
replacement
» The ACC/AHA guidelines recommend:
» - Surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR)
in asymptomatic patients with severe AS and
an LVEF <50%, who are ages <65 years or
have a life expectancy >20 years.[26]Studies
have reported significant differences in survival,
beginning as early as 3 years post-valve
replacement, between those with preoperative
LVEF >50% and patients with LVEF <50%.[77]
Delaying surgery in these patients may lead
to irreversible LV dysfunction and worsened
survival.
» - Either surgical or transfemoral transcatheter
aortic valve replacement (TAVR) in
asymptomatic patients with severe AS and an
LVEF <50%, who are 65 to 80 years of age
and have no contraindications to transfemoral
TAVR, after shared decision-making based on
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
the patient wishes, anatomic considerations,
concomitant coronary artery disease and/or
other valvular heart disease, comorbidities (e.g.,
frailty, dementia), and surgical risk.[26]
» - TAVR in preference to SAVR in asymptomatic
patients with severe AS and LVEF <50% who
are of any age and have: a life expectancy <10
years and no contraindication to transfemoral
TAVR; a high or prohibitive surgical risk, if the
predicted post-TAVR survival is >12 months with
an acceptable quality of life.[26]
» Surgical risk can be estimated using scoring
systems such as the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality (STS-
PROM) and the EuroScore II.[46]  [Society
of Thoracic Surgeons: risk calculator] (http://
www.sts.org/quality-research-patient-safety/
quality/risk-calculator-and-models/risk-calculator)
 These models utilize a variety of risk factors
to predict postoperative outcome after valve
surgery. Mortality estimates are used in
conjunction with assessments of frailty, major
organ system compromise, and procedure-
specific impediments to classify each patient’s
overall surgical risk: low risk; intermediate risk;
high risk; prohibitive risk.[26]
plus long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Antibiotic prophylaxis for the prevention of
infective endocarditis should be considered
in patients with prosthetic cardiac valves,
including transcatheter-implanted prostheses
and homografts, before dental procedures that
involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the
periapical region of teeth or perforation of the
oral mucosa.[26]
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist
is indicated in patients who have had aortic
valve replacement using prosthetic mechanical
valves.[26]
» Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are
not recommended in patients requiring long-
term anticoagulation for a mechanical valve
regardless of coexisting atrial fibrillation.[26]
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
Acute
» Anticoagulation is not required if bioprosthetic
valves are used, except in the presence of atrial
fibrillation, where anticoagulation is indicated.
adjunct medical therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Medical therapy for hypertension and
hyperlipidemia is appropriate in patients with
AS and hypertension and/or coronary artery
disease.[26]
» Statin therapy is indicated for primary and
secondary prevention of atherosclerosis in all
patients with calcific AS on the basis of standard
risk scores.[26]
» In patients who have undergone TAVR, renin-
angiotensin system blocker therapy (ACE
inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker) may be
considered to reduce the long-term risk of all-
cause mortality.[26]
severe AS: abnormal
exercise test, very severe
AS, rapid progression, or
elevated BNP
1st surgical aortic valve replacement
» The ACC/AHA guidelines recommend
surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) in
asymptomatic patients with severe AS and
low surgical risk who have: an abnormal
exercise test (i.e., decreased exercise tolerance
[normalized for age and sex] or a fall in systolic
blood pressure of ≥10 mmHg from baseline
to peak exercise); very severe AS; rapid
progression; elevated serum B-type natriuretic
peptide (BNP) levels.
» Surgical risk can be estimated using scoring
systems such as the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality (STS-
PROM) and the EuroScore II.[46]  [Society
of Thoracic Surgeons: risk calculator] (http://
www.sts.org/quality-research-patient-safety/
quality/risk-calculator-and-models/risk-calculator)
 These models utilize a variety of risk factors
to predict postoperative outcome after valve
surgery. Mortality estimates are used in
conjunction with assessments of frailty, major
organ system compromise, and procedure-
specific impediments to classify each patient’s
overall surgical risk: low risk; intermediate risk;
high risk; prohibitive risk.[26]
plus long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
» Antibiotic prophylaxis for the prevention of
infective endocarditis should be considered
in patients with prosthetic cardiac valves,
including transcatheter-implanted prostheses
and homografts, before dental procedures that
involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the
periapical region of teeth or perforation of the
oral mucosa.[26]
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist
is indicated in patients who have had aortic
valve replacement using prosthetic mechanical
valves.[26]
» Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are
not recommended in patients requiring long-
term anticoagulation for a mechanical valve
regardless of coexisting atrial fibrillation.[26]
» Anticoagulation is not required if bioprosthetic
valves are used, except in the presence of atrial
fibrillation, where anticoagulation is indicated.
adjunct medical therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Medical therapy for hypertension and
hyperlipidemia is appropriate in patients with
AS and hypertension and/or coronary artery
disease.[26]
» Statin therapy is indicated for primary and
secondary prevention of atherosclerosis in all
patients with calcific AS on the basis of standard
risk scores.[26]
severe AS: normal LV
systolic function with
progressive decrease in
LVEF <60%
1st consider surgical aortic valve replacement
» Surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR)
may be considered in asymptomatic patients
with severe AS and normal LV systolic function
at rest and low surgical risk, when there is a
progressive decrease in LVEF on at least three
serial imaging studies to <60% without an
alternative cause.[26]
» Surgical risk can be estimated using scoring
systems such as the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality (STS-
PROM) and the EuroScore II.[46]  [Society
of Thoracic Surgeons: risk calculator] (http://
www.sts.org/quality-research-patient-safety/
quality/risk-calculator-and-models/risk-calculator)
 These models utilize a variety of risk factors
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
Acute
to predict postoperative outcome after valve
surgery. Mortality estimates are used in
conjunction with assessments of frailty, major
organ system compromise, and procedure-
specific impediments to classify each patient’s
overall surgical risk: low risk; intermediate risk;
high risk; prohibitive risk.[26]
adjunct long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Antibiotic prophylaxis for the prevention of
infective endocarditis should be considered
in patients with prosthetic cardiac valves,
including transcatheter-implanted prostheses
and homografts, before dental procedures that
involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the
periapical region of teeth or perforation of the
oral mucosa.[26]
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist
is indicated in patients who have had aortic
valve replacement using prosthetic mechanical
valves.[26]
» Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are
not recommended in patients requiring long-
term anticoagulation for a mechanical valve
regardless of coexisting atrial fibrillation.[26]
» Anticoagulation is not required if bioprosthetic
valves are used, except in the presence of atrial
fibrillation, where anticoagulation is indicated.
adjunct medical therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Medical therapy for hypertension and
hyperlipidemia is appropriate in patients with
AS and hypertension and/or coronary artery
disease.[26]
» Statin therapy is indicated for primary and
secondary prevention of atherosclerosis in all
patients with calcific AS on the basis of standard
risk scores.[26]
nonsevere AS:
undergoing bypass, valve,
or aortic surgery
1st consider concomitant prophylactic valve
replacement
» When patients with moderately stenotic
valves undergo cardiac surgery, the decision
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
to replace the valve is less clear cut than when
there is severe stenosis. The increased risk of
adding aortic valve replacement to the planned
surgery needs to be balanced against the
future likelihood of AS progressing to a severe,
symptomatic state.
» The ACC/AHA guidelines advise that aortic
valve replacement with either transcatheter
aortic valve replacement (TAVR) or surgical
aortic valve replacement (SAVR) may be
considered for asymptomatic patients with
moderate AS who are undergoing other cardiac
surgery.[26]
adjunct long-term infective endocarditis antibiotic
prophylaxis
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Antibiotic prophylaxis for the prevention of
infective endocarditis should be considered
in patients with prosthetic cardiac valves,
including transcatheter-implanted prostheses
and homografts, before dental procedures that
involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the
periapical region of teeth or perforation of the
oral mucosa.[26]
adjunct long-term anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Anticoagulation with a vitamin K antagonist
is indicated in patients who have had aortic
valve replacement using prosthetic mechanical
valves.[26]
» Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) are
not recommended in patients requiring long-
term anticoagulation for a mechanical valve
regardless of coexisting atrial fibrillation.[26]
» Anticoagulation is not required if bioprosthetic
valves are used, except in the presence of atrial
fibrillation, where anticoagulation is indicated.
adjunct medical therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Medical therapy for hypertension and
hyperlipidemia is appropriate in patients with
AS and hypertension and/or coronary artery
disease.[26]
» Statin therapy is indicated for primary and
secondary prevention of atherosclerosis in all
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
Acute
patients with calcific AS on the basis of standard
risk scores.[26]
» In patients who have undergone TAVR, renin-
angiotensin system blocker therapy (ACE
inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker) may be
considered to reduce the long-term risk of all-
cause mortality.[26]
nonsevere AS: not
undergoing bypass, valve,
or aortic surgery
1st medical therapy and follow-up
» Medical therapy for hypertension and
hyperlipidemia is appropriate in patients
with AS and hypertension and/or coronary
artery disease.[26] Statin therapy is indicated
for primary and secondary prevention of
atherosclerosis in all patients with calcific AS on
the basis of standard risk scores.[26]
» Serial transthoracic echocardiograms
are recommended every 3 to 5 years in
asymptomatic patients with mild stenosis, and
every 1 to 2 years in asymptomatic people with
moderate stenosis.[26]
Primary prevention
There are no effective strategies for the primary prevention of AS; however, it remains to be seen if the
incidence of AS will decrease with the increased recognition and treatment of cardiovascular disease risk
factors that appear to contribute to aortic valve pathology.
Secondary prevention
Antibiotic prophylaxis for the prevention of infective endocarditis is no longer routinely recommended in
patients with AS who undergo dental procedures. However, it should be considered in the following high-risk
groups before dental procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the periapical region of teeth
or perforation of the oral mucosa:[26]
• Patients with prosthetic cardiac valves, including transcatheter-implanted prostheses and homografts
• Patients with a history of valve repair using prosthetic cardiac material such as annuloplasty rings and
chords
• Patients with previous infective endocarditis
• Patients with unrepaired cyanotic congenital heart disease or repaired congenital heart disease, with
residual shunts or valvular regurgitation at the site of, or adjacent to the site of, a prosthetic patch or
device
• Cardiac transplant recipients with valve regurgitation due to a structurally abnormal valve.
Patient discussions
The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) recommends ensuring that
patients with prosthetic valves be aware of the need for antibiotics prior to certain medical procedures
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Aortic stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
(e.g., dental visits); the patient should be counseled to seek medical professional advice about the
appropriateness of prophylaxis if there is any uncertainty.[26]
Patients should also be made aware that following aortic valve replacement, they still have significant
valve disease. In addition, other cardiovascular comorbidities frequently exist, and thus appropriate diet
and exercise regimens should be adopted.
The return of preoperative symptoms needs to be brought to the attention of a medical professional as
soon as they are noted, so that appropriate evaluation can be performed.
If the patient with AS requires intervention, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
in the UK recommends discussing the possible benefits and risks of intervention. It is advised that the
following is included in the discussion:[28]
• The long and short term benefits to quality of life
• Prosthetic valve durability
• The risks associated with the procedures
• The type of access required for surgery (median sternotomy, minimally invasive surgery, or
transcatheter [for patients at high surgical risk])
• The possible need for other cardiac procedures in future.
In addition, NICE recommends that patients are provided information about:[28]
• The expected progression and prognosis, including the likely length of the asymptomatic stage
• Any need for intervention, including the type of intervention
• The possible effects of other conditions on long term outcomes
• Rehabilitation and long term outcomes
• Pregnancy (if appropriate)
• Palliative care and how to access this (if appropriate).
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Aortic stenosis Follow up
Monitoring
Monitoring
For asymptomatic patients, close follow-up is imperative. While symptoms generally do not occur unless
the patient has severe AS, patients with moderate AS need to be questioned thoroughly about symptoms,
as the patient may often attribute functional decline with progressive AS to other causes such as age. A
large prospective study of asymptomatic patients with severe AS showed that at 5 years only 20% were
free of cardiovascular death or aortic valve replacement (AVR).[90] It may be appropriate to perform an
exercise test in asymptomatic patients with severe AS to assess symptoms and physiologic response to
exercise. Those who become symptomatic or who do not show an appropriate increase in blood pressure
should probably be referred for surgery.[26]
Serial follow-up of asymptomatic patients found to have AS depends on the severity of stenosis.
The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) recommend the following
timeframes for follow-up:[26]
• Mild stenosis: transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) every 3 to 5 years
• Moderate stenosis: TTE every 1 to 2 years
• Severe stenosis: TTE every 6 to 12 months.
The European Society of Cardiology and the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (ESC/
EACS) guidelines place an emphasis on the importance of regular follow-up including TTE, the frequency
of which depends on each individual. Those with severe AS should be followed up every 6 months.
Younger patients with mild AS and no significant calcification may be followed up every 2-3 years.[46]
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in the UK recommends following up as
detailed below:[28]
• Mild and moderate stenosis: TTE every 3 to 5 years
• Severe stenosis: clinical review every 6 to 12 months (which should include TTE) if an intervention
is suitable but not currently needed. NICE advises basing the frequency of review on the
echocardiography findings and shared decision making with the patient.
Following AVR, patients should have a complete physical exam 2 to 4 weeks after hospital discharge,
with attention to the presence or improvement of preoperative symptoms. A transthoracic echocardiogram
should be performed as well to assess prosthetic valve function. In the absence of clinical deterioration,
history and physical exam should be performed at least annually. Any change in clinical status should
be evaluated with an echocardiogram, and patients with bioprosthetic valves should probably have an
echocardiogram annually after 10 years even in the absence of symptoms to evaluate valve function.[26]
While the echocardiographic assessment of transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) prostheses
is similar to the assessment of surgically-placed valves, current recommendations call for more frequent
evaluations in patients with these new devices (yearly).[61] Patients with paravalvular aortic regurgitation
have a higher risk of mortality and should be followed even more closely.[54]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Aortic stenosis Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
acute heart failure long term high
Heart failure occurs when the afterload burden created by the AS limits the ability of the left ventricle
to pump blood to the body. Treatment of heart failure in AS is difficult. Diuretics and careful afterload
reduction with vasodilators is the best option.
Beta-blockers and calcium-channel blockers should be used cautiously if at all because of their negative
inotropic effects on the left ventricle. Therapy for symptomatic AS must address the underlying stenosis
via surgical valve replacement or balloon valvuloplasty.
sudden cardiac death in symptomatic patients variable high
Sudden cardiac death due to ventricular arrhythmia is very rare in asymptomatic patients (1%) but is a
significant concern in symptomatic patients.[85]
sudden cardiac death in asymptomatic patients variable low
Sudden cardiac death due to ventricular arrhythmia is very rare in asymptomatic patients (1%) but is a
significant concern in symptomatic patients.[85]
infection of prosthetic valve variable low
Any prosthetic valve is at risk for infection, and any fever or signs of valve dysfunction should prompt blood
cultures and evaluation of valve function.
thrombosis secondary to a mechanical valve variable low
Mechanical valves are subject to thrombosis and embolization and require lifelong anticoagulation.
restenosis variable low
If patients have a return of preoperative symptoms after replacement, restenosis should be considered.
valve dehiscence variable low
Suspected when patients develop new signs of heart failure or have a diastolic murmur of aortic
regurgitation.
Prognosis
For patients with mild or moderate stenosis, the aortic valve area decreases on average by 0.1 cm²/year
and the mean gradient increases by 7 mmHg annually.[84] It is recommended that patients with moderate
AS have an echocardiogram every 1 to 2 years, and those with mild AS have one every 3 to 5 years.[26]
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Aortic stenosis Follow up
It is important to note that the rate of progression is extremely variable and so the recommended follow-up
periods may vary between individuals.
The onset of symptoms is a significant milestone and portends a poor prognosis, with an average survival of
only 2 to 3 years without surgery. Between 8% and 34% of symptomatic patients die suddenly.[85] It is thus
essential that symptomatic patients be referred for surgical aortic valve replacement.
Surgical replacement of the aortic valve is extremely effective therapy. Advances in prosthetic-valve design,
cardiopulmonary bypass, surgical technique, and anesthesia have steadily improved outcomes for aortic
valve surgery. An analysis of the 2006 American Society of Thoracic Surgery STS database shows that
during the previous decade, the mortality risk of isolated aortic valve replacement decreased from 3.4% to
2.6%. For those <70 years at surgery, the mortality risk is 1.3%.[48] Patients who survive surgery have near-
normal life expectancy, with relative survival at 5, 10, and 15 years of 99%, 85%, and 82%, respectively.[86]
[87] Nearly all patients have improvement in ejection fraction and heart failure symptoms, with the most
significant benefit seen in those with more advanced preoperative symptoms.[88] [89] For those who do
not improve, factors to consider are valve dysfunction, less-than-expected improvement in preoperative left
ventricle function, valve-prosthesis mismatch, and other comorbid conditions.
Appropriately selected patients at all levels of surgical risk may be offered surgery or transcatheter aortic
valve replacement (TAVR), while patients with prohibitive risk (i.e., surgical noncandidates) should be
referred for TAVR if predicted post-TAVR survival is greater than 12 months.[61] [26] In the PARTNER
study comparing surgery and TAVR in high-risk patients, mortality and symptom reduction were similar at
2 and 5 years for each modality.[54] [55] Periprocedural risks varied at 30 days; vascular complications
and neurologic events such as stroke occurred more frequently after TAVR, while major bleeding and
new-onset atrial fibrillation more commonly followed surgery.[56][57] Acute kidney injury and new
pacemaker implantation were complications of both interventions at similar rates.[56] At 2 and 5 years,
echocardiographic improvements in valve area and mean gradients were similar in both groups, but total
and paravalvular aortic regurgitation was encountered more frequently after TAVR.[54] [55] [59] In patients
with prohibitive surgical risk (i.e., surgical noncandidates), the PARTNER trial compared standard therapy,
including balloon aortic valvuloplasty, with TAVR and found a 20% absolute reduction in mortality at 1 year in
favor of TAVR.[62] At 3 years, mortality with TAVR was 54.1% compared with 80.9% with standard therapy,
while at 5 years, mortality was 71.8% and 93.6%, respectively.[63] [64] Heart failure symptoms improved
between 30 days and 6 months, while at 3 years 29.7% of patients in the TAVR group were alive with
New York Heart Association Class I/II symptoms, compared with 4.8% of patients in the standard therapy
group.[62] [63] [65] Patients treated with TAVR also showed significant improvements on assessments of
health-related quality of life when compared with those receiving standard therapy.[66]
Many patients with bicuspid aortic valves will require valve replacement at some point in their lives. After
valve replacement, patients with bicuspid valves have a significant mortality benefit and improvement in
symptoms. However, they remain at risk for aortic dissection and require serial follow-up for this potential
complication.
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Aortic stenosis Guidelines
GUIDELINES
Diagnostic guidelines
International
ACR appropriateness criteria: preprocedural planning for transcatheter aortic
valve replacement (https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/Clinical-Tools-and-
Reference/Appropriateness-Criteria)   [29]
Published by: American College of Radiology Last published: 2023
Guideline for the management of patients with valvular heart disease (https://
www.acc.org/guidelines)   [26]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association
Last published: 2020
Recommendations for evaluation of prosthetic valves with two-dimensional
and Doppler echocardiography (https://www.asecho.org/assessment-of-
structure-and-function)   [43]
Published by: American Society of Echocardiography Last published: 2009
Recommendations on the echocardiographic assessment of aortic
valve stenosis: a focused update from the European Association of
Cardiovascular Imaging and the American Society of Echocardiography
(https://www.asecho.org/assessment-of-structure-and-function)   [44]
Published by: European Association of Echocardiography; American
Society of Echocardiography
Last published: 2017
Recommendations for the use of echocardiography in new transcatheter
interventions for valvular heart disease (https://www.asecho.org/technique-
based)   [45]
Published by: European Association of Echocardiography; American
Society of Echocardiography
Last published: 2011
Guidelines on the management of valvular heart disease (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines)   [46]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology; European Association
for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery
Last published: 2021
Heart valve disease presenting in adults: investigation and management
(https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng208)   [28]
Published by: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2021
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Aortic stenosis Guidelines
Treatment guidelines
International
2020 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on management of conduction
disturbances in patients undergoing transcatheter aortic valve replacement
(https://www.jacc.org/guidelines/expert-consensus-documents)   [80]
Published by: American College of Cardiology Last published: 2020
Guideline for the management of patients with valvular heart disease (https://
www.acc.org/guidelines)   [26]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association
Last published: 2020
Canadian Cardiovascular Society position statement for transcatheter aortic
valve implantation (http://www.ccs.ca/index.php/en/guidelines/guidelines-
library)   [81]
Published by: Canadian Cardiovascular Society Last published: 2019
ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/EACTS/HVS/SCA/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2017 appropriate
use criteria for the treatment of patients with severe aortic stenosis (http://
www.onlinejacc.org/collection/appropriate-use-criteria)   [82]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; American Society of Echocardiography; European
Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery; Heart Valve Society; Society
of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists; Society for Cardiovascular
Angiography and Interventions; Society of Cardiovascular Computed
Tomography; Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance; Society of
Thoracic Surgeons
Last published: 2017
Guidelines on the management of valvular heart disease (https://www.j-
circ.or.jp/english/cj/jcs-guidelines)   [83]
Published by: Japanese Circulation Society; Japanese Society for
Cardiovascular Surgery; Japanese Association for Thoracic Surgery;
Japanese Society for Vascular Surgery; Japanese College of Cardiology;
Japanese Society of Echocardiography; Japanese Association for
Cardiological Intervention and Therapeutics; Japanese Society for Heart
Valve Disease; Japan Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery
Last published: 2020
Guidelines on the management of valvular heart disease (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines)   [46]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology; European Association
for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery
Last published: 2021
Heart valve disease presenting in adults: investigation and management
(https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng208)   [28]
Published by: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2021
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Aortic stenosis Guidelines
GUIDELINES
International
Transcatheter aortic valve implantation for aortic stenosis (https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg586)   [47]
Published by: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2017
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Aortic stenosis Online resources
Online resources
1. Society of Thoracic Surgeons: risk calculator (http://www.sts.org/quality-research-patient-safety/quality/
risk-calculator-and-models/risk-calculator)  (external link)
ONLINE RESOURCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Aortic stenosis References
REFERENCES
Key articles
• Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of
patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Joint Committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2021 Feb 2;143(5):e72-227. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000923)
• National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Heart valve disease presenting in adults:
investigation and management. Nov 2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ng208)
• Vahanian A, Beyersdorf F, Praz F, et al. 2021 ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular
heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2022 Feb 12;43(7):561-632.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/
article/43/7/561/6358470)
References
1. European Society of Cardiology. Epidemiology of aortic valve stenosis (AS) and of aortic valve
incompetence (AI): is the prevalence of AS/AI similar in different parts of the world?. Feb 2020
[internet publication].  Full text (https://www.escardio.org/Journals/E-Journal-of-Cardiology-Practice/
Volume-18/epidemiology-of-aortic-valve-stenosis-as-and-of-aortic-valve-incompetence-ai)
2. Osnabrugge RL, Mylotte D, Head SJ, et al. Aortic stenosis in the elderly: disease prevalence and
number of candidates for transcatheter aortic valve replacement: a meta-analysis and modeling
study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013 Sep 10;62(11):1002-12.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0735109713020792)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23727214?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Martin SS, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. 2024 heart disease and stroke statistics: a report of US
and global data from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2024 Feb 20;149(8):e347-913. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001209)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38264914?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Strange GA, Stewart S, Curzen N, et al. Uncovering the treatable burden of severe aortic stenosis
in the UK. Open Heart. 2022 Jan;9(1):e001783.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC8739674)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35082136?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Milin AC, Vorobiof G, Aksoy O, et al. Insights into aortic sclerosis and its relationship with coronary
artery disease. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Sep 5;3(5):e001111.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC4323780)
6. Freeman RV, Otto CM. Spectrum of calcific aortic valve disease: pathogenesis, disease
progression, and treatment strategies. Circulation. 2005 Jun 21;111(24):3316-26.  Full text
(https://circ.ahajournals.org/content/111/24/3316.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15967862?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Aortic stenosis References
7. Lewin MB, Otto CM. The bicuspid aortic valve: adverse outcomes from infancy to old age. Circulation.
2005 Feb 22;111(7):832-4.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/111/7/832.full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15723989?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Iung B, Baron G, Butchart EG, et al. A prospective survey of patients with valvular heart
disease in Europe: The Euro Heart Survey on Valvular Heart Disease. Eur Heart J. 2003
Jul;24(13):1231-43.  Full text (http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/content/24/13/1231.full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12831818?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Thanassoulis G, Campbell CY, Owens DS, et al. Genetic associations with valvular
calcification and aortic stenosis. N Engl J Med. 2013 Feb 7;368(6):503-12.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1109034)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23388002?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Stewart BF, Siscovick D, Lind BK, et al. Clinical factors associated with calcific aortic valve
disease. Cardiovascular Health Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997 Mar 1;29(3):630-4. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9060903?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Rattazzi M, Bertacco E, Del Vecchio A, et al. Aortic valve calcification in chronic kidney disease.
Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2013 Dec;28(12):2968-76.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gft310)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24097800?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Shroff GR, Bangalore S, Bhave NM, et al. Evaluation and management of aortic stenosis in Chronic
Kidney Disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2021 Jun
22;143(25):e1088-114.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000979)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33980041?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. O'Brien KD. Pathogenesis of calcific aortic valve disease: a disease process comes of age
(and a good deal more). Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006 Aug;26(8):1721-8.  Full text
(http://atvb.ahajournals.org/content/26/8/1721.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16709942?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Eveborn GW, Schirmer H, Heggelund G, et al. The evolving epidemiology of valvular aortic
stenosis. The Tromsø study. Heart. 2013 Mar;99(6):396-400.  Full text (http://heart.bmj.com/
content/99/6/396.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22942293?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Roberts WC, Ko JM. Valvular heart disease: Frequency by decades of unicuspid, bicuspid, and
tricuspid aortic valves in adults having isolated aortic valve replacement for aortic stenosis, with
or without associated aortic regurgitation. Circulation. 2005 Feb 22;111(7):920-5.  Full text (http://
circ.ahajournals.org/content/111/7/920.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15710758?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Umana E, Ahmed W, Alpert MA. Valvular and perivalvular abnormalities in end-stage renal disease.
Am J Med Sci. 2003 Apr;325(4):237-42. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12695729?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Aortic stenosis References
REFERENCES
17. Adabag AS, Dykoski R, Ward H, et al. Critical stenosis of aortic and mitral valves after mediastinal
irradiation. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2004 Oct;63(2):247-50. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15390239?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Rosenhek R, Rader F, Loho N, et al. Valvular heart disease: Statins but not angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors delay progression of aortic stenosis. Circulation. 2004 Sep 7;110(10):1291-5. 
Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/110/10/1291.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15337704?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Cowell SJ, Newby DE, Prescott RJ, et al. A randomized trial of intensive lipid-lowering therapy in
calcific aortic stenosis. N Engl J Med. 2005 Jun 9;352(23):2389-97.  Full text (http://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJMoa043876#t=article)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15944423?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Yan AT, Koh M, Chan KK, et al. Association between cardiovascular risk factors and aortic stenosis:
the CANHEART aortic stenosis study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 Mar 28;69(12):1523-32.  Full
text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109717303340)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28335833?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Ozumi K, Tasaki H, Yamashita K, et al. Valvular and supravalvular aortic stenosis in heterozygous
familial hypercholesterolemia, a case report. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2005;12(5):289-93. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16205026?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Nazarzadeh M, Pinho-Gomes AC, Smith Byrne K, et al. Systolic blood pressure and risk of valvular
heart disease: a Mendelian randomization study. JAMA Cardiol. 2019 Aug 1;4(8):788-95.  Full
text (https://www.doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2019.2202)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31290937?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Kontogeorgos S, Thunström E, Lappas G, et al. Cumulative incidence and predictors of acquired
aortic stenosis in a large population of men followed for up to 43 years. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2022
Feb 13;22(1):43.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8842940)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35152876?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Martinsson A, Li X, Zöller B, et al. Familial aggregation of aortic valvular stenosis: a nationwide
study of sibling risk. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2017 Dec;10(6):e001742.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5734674)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29242201?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Kaltoft M, Langsted A, Nordestgaard BG. Obesity as a causal risk factor for aortic valve stenosis.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020 Jan 21;75(2):163-76.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0735109719384499)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31948645?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of
patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Joint Committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2021 Feb 2;143(5):e72-227. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000923)
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Aortic stenosis References
27. Lombard TJ, Selzer A. Valvular aortic stenosis. A clinical and hemodynamic profile of patients.
Ann Intern Med. 1987 Feb;106(2):292-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3800187?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Heart valve disease presenting in adults:
investigation and management. Nov 2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ng208)
29. American College of Radiology. ACR appropriateness criteria: preprocedural planning for transcatheter
aortic valve replacement. 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3082594/
Narrative)
30. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patients
with valvular heart disease: executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Joint Committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2021 Feb
2;143(5):e35-71.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000932)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33332149?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Balciunaite G, Skorniakov V, Rimkus A, et al. Prevalence and prognostic value of late gadolinium
enhancement on CMR in aortic stenosis: meta-analysis. Eur Radiol. 2020 Jan;30(1):640-51. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31407030?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Tarantini G, Tang G, Nai Fovino L, et al. Management of coronary artery disease in patients
undergoing transcatheter aortic valve implantation. A clinical consensus statement from the
European Association of Percutaneous Cardiovascular Interventions in collaboration with the ESC
Working Group on cardiovascular surgery. EuroIntervention. 2023 May 15;19(1):37-52.  Full text
(https://eurointervention.pcronline.com/article/management-of-coronary-artery-disease-in-patients-
undergoing-transcatheter-aortic-valve-implantation-a-clinical-consensus-statement-from-the-european-
association-of-percutaneous-cardiovascular-interventions-in-collaboration-with-the-esc-working-
group-on-cardiovascular-surgery)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36811935?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Ruile P, Blanke P, Krauss T, et al. Pre-procedural assessment of aortic annulus dimensions for
transcatheter aortic valve replacement: comparison of a non-contrast 3D MRA protocol with
contrast-enhanced cardiac dual-source CT angiography. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2016
Apr;17(4):458-66.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/ehjcimaging/article/17/4/458/2464803)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26219296?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Chaturvedi A, Hobbs SK, Ling FS, et al. MRI evaluation prior to Transcatheter Aortic
Valve Implantation (TAVI): when to acquire and how to interpret. Insights Imaging. 2016
Apr;7(2):245-54.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4805621)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26911969?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Généreux P, Stone GW, O'Gara PT, et al. Natural history, diagnostic approaches, and therapeutic
strategies for patients with asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016 May
17;67(19):2263-88.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109716010287?
via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27049682?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Aortic stenosis References
REFERENCES
36. Ennezat PV, Maréchaux S, Iung B, et al. Exercise testing and exercise stress echocardiography
in asymptomatic aortic valve stenosis. Heart. 2009 Jun;95(11):877-84. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18812409?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Picano E, Pibarot P, Lancellotti P, et al. The emerging role of exercise testing and stress
echocardiography in valvular heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009 Dec 8;54(24):2251-60. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19958961?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Maréchaux S, Hachicha Z, Bellouin A, et al. Usefulness of exercise-stress echocardiography
for risk stratification of true asymptomatic patients with aortic valve stenosis. Eur Heart J. 2010
Jun;31(11):1390-7.  Full text (http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/content/31/11/1390.full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20308041?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Amato MC, Moffa PJ, Werner KE, et al. Treatment decision in asymptomatic aortic valve stenosis: role
of exercise testing. Heart. 2001 Oct;86(4):381-6.  Full text (http://heart.bmj.com/content/86/4/381.long) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11559673?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Das P, Rimington H, Chambers J. Exercise testing to stratify risk in aortic stenosis. Eur Heart J. 2005
Jul;26(13):1309-13.  Full text (http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/content/26/13/1309.long)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15820999?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Loscalzo J. From clinical observation to mechanism--Heyde's syndrome. N Engl J Med.
2012 Nov 15;367(20):1954-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23150964?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Nishimura RA, Holmes DR Jr. Clinical practice. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. N Engl
J Med. 2004 Mar 25;350(13):1320-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15044643?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Zoghbi WA, Chambers JB, Dumesnil JG, et al. Recommendations for evaluation of prosthetic valves
with echocardiography and doppler ultrasound. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2009 Sep;22(9):975-1014. 
Full text (https://onlinejase.com/article/S0894-7317(09)00676-2/fulltext)
44. Baumgartner H, Hung J, Bermejo J, et al. Recommendations on the echocardiographic assessment of
aortic valve stenosis: a focused update from the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging and
the American Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2017 Apr;30(4):372-92.  Full text
(https://www.asecho.org/guideline/echocardiographic-assessment-of-aortic-valve-stenosis-a-focused-
update)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28385280?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Zamorano JL, Badano LP, Bruce C, et al. EAE/ASE recommendations for the use of echocardiography
in new transcatheter interventions for valvular heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2011 Sep;32(17):2189-214. 
Full text (http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/content/32/17/2189.full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21885465?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Vahanian A, Beyersdorf F, Praz F, et al. 2021 ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular
heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2022 Feb 12;43(7):561-632.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/
article/43/7/561/6358470)
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Aortic stenosis References
47. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation for aortic
stenosis. Jul 2017 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ipg586)
48. Brown JM, O'Brien SM, Wu C, et al. Isolated aortic valve replacement in North America comprising
108,687 patients in 10 years: changes in risks, valve types, and outcomes in the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons National Database. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009 Jan;137(1):82-90. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19154908?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Rahimtoola SH. Choice of prosthetic heart valve for adult patients. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2003 Mar 19;41(6):893-904. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12651032?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Hammermeister K, Sethi GK, Henderson WG, et al. Outcomes 15 years after valve replacement
with a mechanical versus a bioprosthetic valve: final report of the Veterans Affairs randomized trial. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 2000 Oct;36(4):1152-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11028464?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Lund O, Bland M. Risk-corrected impact of mechanical versus bioprosthetic valves on long-term
mortality after aortic valve replacement. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2006 Jul;132(1):20-6. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16798297?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Stassano P, Di Tommaso L, Monaco M, et al. Aortic valve replacement: a prospective randomized
evaluation of mechanical versus biological valves in patients ages 55 to 70 years. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2009 Nov 10;54(20):1862-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19892237?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Kundi H, Strom JB, Valsdottir LR, et al. Trends in isolated surgical aortic valve replacement according
to hospital-based transcatheter aortic valve replacement volumes. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2018 Nov
12;11(21):2148-56.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1936879818314377?
via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30343022?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Kodali SK, Williams MR, Smith CR, et al. Two-year outcomes after transcatheter or surgical aortic-
valve replacement. N Engl J Med. 2012 May 3;366(18):1686-95. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22443479?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Mack MJ, Leon MB, Smith CR, et al. 5-year outcomes of transcatheter aortic valve replacement
or surgical aortic valve replacement for high surgical risk patients with aortic stenosis (PARTNER
1): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015 Jun 20;385(9986):2477-84. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25788234?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Smith CR, Leon MB, Mack MJ, et al; PARTNER Trial Investigators. Transcatheter versus surgical
aortic-valve replacement in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2011 Jun 9;364(23):2187-98. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21639811?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Généreux P, Cohen DJ, Williams MR, et al. Bleeding complications after surgical aortic valve
replacement compared with transcatheter aortic valve replacement: insights from the PARTNER I Trial
(Placement of Aortic Transcatheter Valve). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Mar 25;63(11):1100-9. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24291283?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Aortic stenosis References
REFERENCES
58. Reynolds MR, Magnuson EA, Wang K, et al; PARTNER Trial Investigators. Health-related quality
of life after transcatheter or surgical aortic valve replacement in high-risk patients with severe
aortic stenosis: results from the PARTNER (Placement of AoRTic TraNscathetER Valve) trial
(Cohort A). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Aug 7;60(6):548-58.  Full text (http://content.onlinejacc.org/
article.aspx?articleID=1270594)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22818074?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Hahn RT, Pibarot P, Stewart WJ, et al. Comparison of transcatheter and surgical aortic valve
replacement in severe aortic stenosis: a longitudinal study of echocardiography parameters in
cohort A of the PARTNER trial (placement of aortic transcatheter valves). J Am Coll Cardiol.
2013 Jun 25;61(25):2514-21. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23623915?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Gleason TG, Reardon MJ, Popma JJ, et al. 5-year outcomes of self-expanding transcatheter versus
surgical aortic valve replacement in high-risk patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Dec 4;72(22):2687-96. 
Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109718382901?via%3Dihub)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30249462?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Holmes DR Jr, Mack MJ, Kaul S, et al. 2012 ACCF/AATS/SCAI/STS expert consensus document on
transcatheter aortic valve replacement. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Mar 27;59(13):1200-54.  Full text
(http://content.onlinejacc.org/article.aspx)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22300974?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Leon MB, Smith CR, Mack M, et al. Transcatheter aortic-valve implantation for aortic stenosis in
patients who cannot undergo surgery. N Engl J Med. 2010 Oct 21;363(17):1597-607.  Full text (http://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1008232#t=article)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20961243?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Kapadia SR, Tuzcu EM, Makkar RR, et al. Long-term outcomes of inoperable patients with aortic
stenosis randomly assigned to transcatheter aortic valve replacement or standard therapy. Circulation.
2014 Oct 21;130(17):1483-92.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/130/17/1483.long)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25205802?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64. Kapadia SR, Leon MB, Makkar RR, et al. 5-year outcomes of transcatheter aortic valve replacement
compared with standard treatment for patients with inoperable aortic stenosis (PARTNER
1): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015 Jun 20;385(9986):2485-91. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25788231?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
65. Makkar RR, Fontana GP, Jilaihawi H, et al. Transcatheter aortic-valve replacement for
inoperable severe aortic stenosis. N Engl J Med. 2012 May 3;366(18):1696-704. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22443478?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Reynolds MR, Magnuson EA, Lei Y, et al. Valvular heart disease: Health-related quality of life after
transcatheter aortic valve replacement in inoperable patients with severe aortic stenosis. Circulation.
2011 Nov 1;124(18):1964-72.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/124/18/1964.full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21969017?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Leon MB, Smith CR, Mack MJ, et al; PARTNER 2 Investigators. Transcatheter or surgical aortic-
valve replacement in intermediate-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2016 Apr 28;374(17):1609-20.  Full
62 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 63 ===
Aortic stenosis References
text (http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1514616)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27040324?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. Makkar RR, Thourani VH, Mack MJ, et al. Five-year outcomes of transcatheter or surgical
aortic-valve replacement. N Engl J Med. 2020 Feb 27;382(9):799-809.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1910555)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31995682?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
69. Reardon MJ, Van Mieghem NM, Popma JJ, et al; SURTAVI Investigators. Surgical or transcatheter
aortic-valve replacement in intermediate-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2017 Apr 6;376(14):1321-31.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28304219?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. Siemieniuk RA, Agoritsas T, Manja V, et al. Transcatheter versus surgical aortic valve replacement in
patients with severe aortic stenosis at low and intermediate risk: systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMJ. 2016 Sep 28;354:i5130.  Full text (http://www.bmj.com/content/354/bmj.i5130.long)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27683246?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
71. Mack MJ, Leon MB, Thourani VH, et al. Transcatheter aortic-valve replacement with a balloon-
expandable valve in low-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2019 May 2;380(18):1695-705.  Full text
(https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1814052)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30883058?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Popma JJ, Deeb GM, Yakubov SJ, et al. Transcatheter aortic-valve replacement with a self-expanding
valve in low-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2019 May 2;380(18):1706-15.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1816885)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30883053?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Kolkailah AA, Doukky R, Pelletier MP, et al. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation
versus surgical aortic valve replacement for severe aortic stenosis in people with low
surgical risk. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Dec 20;12:CD013319.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD013319.pub2)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31860123?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74. Letac B, Cribier A, Eltchaninoff H, et al. Evaluation of restenosis after balloon dilatation in adult
aortic stenosis by repeat catheterization. Am Heart J. 1991 Jul;122(1 Pt 1):55-60. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2063763?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
75. Rossebø AB, Pedersen TR, Boman K, et al; SEAS Investigators. Intensive lipid lowering with
simvastatin and ezetimibe in aortic stenosis. N Engl J Med. 2008 Sep 25;359(13):1343-56. 
Full text (http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa0804602#t=article)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18765433?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. Chan KL, Teo K, Dumesnil JG, et al; ASTRONOMER Investigators. Effect of lipid lowering with
rosuvastatin on progression of aortic stenosis: results of the aortic stenosis progression observation:
measuring effects of rosuvastatin (ASTRONOMER) trial. Circulation. 2010 Jan 19;121(2):306-14. 
Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/121/2/306.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20048204?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
63
=== Page 64 ===
Aortic stenosis References
REFERENCES
77. Schwarz F, Baumann P, Manthey J, et al. The effect of aortic valve replacement on survival.
Circulation. 1982;66:1105-1110.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/66/5/1105.full.pdf+html)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7127696?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
78. Smith WT 4th, Ferguson TB Jr, Ryan T, et al. Should coronary artery bypass graft surgery patients
with mild or moderate aortic stenosis undergo concomitant aortic valve replacement? A decision
analysis approach to the surgical dilemma. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:1241-1247. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15364326?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
79. Pereira JJ, Balaban K, Lauer MS, et al. Aortic valve replacement in patients with mild or moderate
aortic stenosis and coronary bypass surgery. Am J Med. 2005;118:735-742. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15989907?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80. Lilly SM, Deshmukh AJ, Epstein AE, et al. 2020 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on
management of conduction disturbances in patients undergoing transcatheter aortic valve
replacements: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2020 Nov 17;76(20):2391-411.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.08.050) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33190683?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
81. Asgar AW, Ouzounian M, Adams C, et al. 2019 Canadian Cardiovascular Society position statement
for transcatheter aortic valve implantation. Can J Cardiol. 2019 Nov;35(11):1437-48.  Full text (https://
www.onlinecjc.ca/article/S0828-282X(19)31158-4/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31679616?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82. Bonow RO, Brown AS, Gillam LD, et al. ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/EACTS/HVS/SCA/SCAI/SCCT/
SCMR/STS 2017 Appropriate use criteria for the treatment of patients with severe aortic
stenosis: a report of the American College of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force,
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of
Echocardiography, European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, Heart Valve Society,
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular
Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 Nov
14;70(20):2566-98.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/early/2017/10/16/j.jacc.2017.09.018?
_ga=2.117494729.1395754991.1522918131-1893325378.1517756171)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29054308?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
83. Izumi C, Eishi K, Ashihara K, et al. JCS/JSCS/JATS/JSVS 2020 guidelines on the management of
valvular heart disease. Circ J. 2020 Oct 23;84(11):2037-119.  Full text (https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/
article/circj/84/11/84_CJ-20-0135/_article)
84. Faggiano P, Ghizzoni G, Sorgato A, et al. Rate of progression of valvular aortic stenosis in adults.
Am J Cardiol. 1992 Jul 15;70(2):229-33. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1626512?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
85. Sorgato A, Faggiano P, Aurigemma GP, et al. Ventricular arrhythmias in adult aortic stenosis:
prevalence, mechanisms, and clinical relevance. Chest. 1998 Feb;113(2):482-91. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9498969?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 65 ===
Aortic stenosis References
86. Ståhle E, Kvidal P, Nyström SO, et al. Long-term relative survival after primary heart valve
replacement. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1997 Jan;11(1):81-91. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9030794?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
87. Kvidal P, Bergstrom R, Horte LG, et al. Observed and relative survival after aortic valve replacement. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 2000 Mar 1;35(3):747-56. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10716479?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
88. Vaquette B, Corbineau H, Laurent M, et al. Valve replacement in patients with critical aortic
stenosis and depressed left ventricular function: predictors of operative risk, left ventricular
function recovery, and long term outcome. Heart. 2005 Oct;91(10):1324-9.  Full text (http://
heart.bmj.com/content/91/10/1324.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16162627?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
89. Sharma UC, Barenbrug P, Pokharel S, et al. Systematic review of the outcome of aortic valve
replacement in patients with aortic stenosis. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004 Jul;78(1):90-5. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15223410?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
90. Pellikka PA, Sarano ME, Nishimura RA, et al. Valvular heart disease: Outcome of 622 adults with
asymptomatic, hemodynamically significant aortic stenosis during prolonged follow-up. Circulation.
2005 Jun 21;111(24):3290-5.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/111/24/3290.full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15956131?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
65
=== Page 66 ===
Aortic stenosis Images
IMAGES
Images
Figure 1: Bicuspid and trileaflet aortic valves with severe calcification following surgical excision
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory University Hospital; used with permission
Figure 2: The systolic crescendo-decrescendo murmur of aortic stenosis
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory University Hospital; used with permission
66 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 67 ===
Aortic stenosis Images
Figure 3: ECG showing changes associated with left ventricular hypertrophy
From the collection of Melanie Everitt MD, Heart Failure & Transplantation Program, Primary Children's
Medical Center, Salt Lake City, UT; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
67
=== Page 68 ===
Aortic stenosis Images
IMAGES
Figure 4: Transesophageal echocardiogram showing the left ventricle outflow tract (LVOT), the aorta (Ao),
and nearly immobile leaflets (arrows) of a severely stenotic aortic valve
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory University Hospital; used with permission
68 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 69 ===
Aortic stenosis Images
Figure 5: Balloon valvuloplasty fluoroscopy film that demonstrates valvuloplasty balloon inflated across a
calcified aortic valve
From the collection of David Liff, MD, Emory University Hospital; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
69
=== Page 70 ===
Aortic stenosis Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
70 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 71 ===
Aortic stenosis Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Sep 04, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
71
=== Page 72 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Matthew Czarny, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
DISCLOSURES: MC declares their institution receives research funding from Medtronic, Abbott, Edwards
Lifesciences, and V-Wave Medical.
Rani Hasan, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
DISCLOSURES: RH declares that he has no competing interests.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Matthew Czarny and Dr Rani Hasan would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Girish L. Kalra and Dr
Vasilis Babaliaros, previous contributors to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: GLK declares that he has no competing interests. VB is a co-investigator in the PARTNER
trial, and he has served as a consultant for Edwards Lifesciences and Abbott Vascular.
// Peer Reviewers:
Peter Block, MD
Professor of Medicine
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
DISCLOSURES: PB declares that he has no competing interests.
Ghada Mikhail, BSc, MD, FRCP
Consultant Cardiologist and Honorary Senior Lecturer
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK
DISCLOSURES: GM has been supported by Edwards Lifesciences (manufacturer of the Edwards Sapien
Transcatheter Valve) for attending cardiology conferences. Both Edwards Lifesciences and Medtronic
(manufacturer of the CoreValve Transcatheter Valve) are contributing to an educational course on the
transcatheter and surgical treatments of aortic and mitral valve disease. Edwards Lifesciences are
supporting a research project on transcatheter treatment of aortic valve disease.
Juan M. Sztajzel, MD
Consultant
Cardiology Center, University Hospital Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
DISCLOSURES: JMS declares that he has no competing interests.
