# Chronic coronary disease

=== Page 1 ===
Chronic
coronary disease
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Nov 11, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Etiology  4
Pathophysiology  4
Classification  5
Case history  5
Diagnosis  7
Approach  7
History and exam  13
Risk factors  16
Tests  18
Differentials  26
Management  29
Approach  29
Treatment algorithm overview  37
Treatment algorithm  38
Emerging  49
Primary prevention  49
Secondary prevention  79
Patient discussions  79
Follow up  80
Monitoring  80
Complications  80
Prognosis  81
Guidelines  82
Diagnostic guidelines  83
Treatment guidelines  85
Online resources  87
Evidence tables  88
References  90
Images  118
Disclaimer  124
=== Page 3 ===
Chronic coronary disease Overview
Summary
Chronic coronary disease (CCD) is initially evaluated with a thorough history, including chest discomfort and
related symptoms, and assessment of risk factors. This is followed by appropriate noninvasive testing guided
by the probability of disease.
Management should focus on lifestyle modification, with emphasis on smoking cessation, physical activity,
lipid control, and blood pressure control.
Aspirin and statin therapy are also central to management and reducing adverse outcomes such as
myocardial infarction and cardiac death. Additional antithrombotic, lipid-lowering, and other therapies may
further reduce these risks in some patients.
For symptomatic patients, beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers, and nitrates reduce angina and increase
exercise tolerance.
Patients with persistent angina despite lifestyle modification and guideline-directed medical therapy may
warrant percutaneous or surgical revascularization for reduction of symptoms.
For some carefully selected patients, revascularization (in addition to lifestyle modification and medical
therapy) may improve survival.
In addition to hypertension and dyslipidemia, comorbidities commonly associated with CCD include diabetes
and chronic kidney disease.
Definition
Coronary heart disease, an inability to provide adequate blood supply to the myocardium, is primarily caused
by atherosclerosis of the epicardial coronary arteries. For this reason the terms ischemic heart disease,
coronary artery disease, coronary heart disease, and coronary disease are often used interchangeably,
although the true pathophysiology is more complex.[1] [2]
Coronary disease is chronic and often progressive. Patients with stable or no symptoms managed in an
outpatient setting are said to have CCD or chronic coronary syndrome. Some patients experience one or
more episodes of myocardial infarction (MI) or unstable angina - together called acute coronary syndromes
(ACS). Although part of the same overall disease process, ACS are managed very differently, usually in
emergency and inpatient settings with different tools for risk stratification and a more aggressive approach to
revascularization. See Overview of acute coronary syndrome .
In addition to MI and unstable angina, complications of CCD include ischemic cardiomyopathy and sudden
cardiac death. Exertional angina is the classic symptom of CCD, but patients may experience dyspnea or
other symptoms. Although routine screening is discouraged, testing may reveal CCD in patients without any
symptoms or complications.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Chronic coronary disease Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
Coronary disease is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the US and worldwide.[4] [5] It is
particularly common among older adults; in the US, the prevalence rises from 7.5% in men and 6.5% in
women ages 40 to 59 years to 30.6% in men and 20.6% in women ages 80 years and older.[6] In the US,
the lifetime risk of developing coronary disease at age 40 years is one in two for men and one in three for
women.[7] Globally, it was estimated that 197.2 million people had coronary disease in 2019, and it was
more prevalent in men (113.7 million) than in women (83.6 million).[8] Despite a male predominance and
roughly 10-year lag in incidence in women, coronary disease is the leading cause of mortality for women
worldwide.[9] [10]
In the US, Canada, and much of Europe, mortality from coronary disease has been declining since at least
1990.[11] [12] This decline is likely caused by improvements in treatment as well as reductions in risk factors
including smoking, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia.[13] There is concern that these improvements may be
offset by increases in obesity, physical inactivity, and diabetes.[14] Globally, coronary disease mortality is
increasing in lower- and middle-income countries such that it is now the leading cause of premature mortality
in all but the least sociodevelopmentally advantaged nations.[5] [15]
Prevalence of coronary disease varies widely both between and within countries.[4] [11] [12] Coronary
disease and many of its risk factors (e.g., hypertension and hyperlipidemia) have both genetic and
environmental influences. On the basis of a study of Swedish twins, the overall heritability of coronary
disease is often cited as 40% to 60%.[16] Family history of coronary disease, particularly premature coronary
disease, is a risk factor for ischemic events in middle-aged adults.[17] Socioeconomic inequalities are
predispositions to coronary disease, and there is increasing attention to social determinants of health
including social support, culture, language, access to care, neighborhood environment, and exposure to
adversity.[12][18] [19] [20]
Etiology
Coronary disease is primarily caused by atherosclerosis.
Less common, nonatherosclerotic causes include vasospasm, endothelial and microvascular dysfunction,
spontaneous thrombosis or embolism, coronary artery dissection, extrinsic compression, systemic vasculitis/
arteritis, and damage from radiation.[1][2] [21] [22] These etiologies are more common in younger patients,
women, and those without traditional risk factors for coronary disease.[21] [22]
At present there is limited evidence to guide diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for coronary disease
etiologies other than atherosclerosis, but there are statements of expert consensus. Epicardial vasospasm
and coronary microvascular dysfunction (also known as microvascular angina) are increasingly grouped as
INOCA (ischemia with nonobstructive coronary arteries).[23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] Spontaneous coronary
artery dissection (SCAD) is usually considered separately.[29]
Pathophysiology
Atherosclerosis is the development of lipid-rich plaques in the arterial wall. Plaque development is the result
of an inflammatory process that can involve not only lipids but also altered smooth muscle cells, matrix
proteins, calcification, necrosis, and hemorrhage. Plaques do not occur uniformly through the arterial tree
and tend to occur at bends, branch points, and other areas of turbulent flow.[30]
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Chronic coronary disease Theory
A traditional model suggests two means of plaque progression. Large thick-walled plaques are thought to
slowly obstruct the lumen of coronary arteries, thereby causing decreased perfusion and chronic intermittent
exertional symptoms when they reach 70% to 80% stenosis. Thin-walled "vulnerable plaques" may not cause
meaningful obstruction until the wall is disrupted, at which point acute hematoma and thrombus formation
cause sudden myocardial infarction (MI) by occluding the arterial lumen locally or embolizing distally into the
coronary circulation. This model explains two clinically important phenomena: 1) MI may occur in patients at
anatomic sites without baseline flow limitation; 2) therapies that reduce chronic intermittent angina (improve
flow) may be different from those that reduce mortality from coronary disease (stabilize plaque, prevent
thrombosis).
The actual process is more varied and complex. In many cases arteries can expand outward, meaning that
plaque size may not correlate with luminal stenosis, which in turn may not correlate with functional flow
limitation.[31] [32] Additionally, plaque development is not linear; plaques may move repeatedly through
development, regression, and erosion/rupture.[31]
Classification
The Canadian Cardiovascular Society grades angina by the extent of limitation of physical activity.[3]
Grade I: Ordinary physical activity (walking, climbing stairs) does not cause angina. Angina occurs with
strenuous or rapid or prolonged exertion at work or recreation.
Grade II: Slight limitation of ordinary activity. Angina may occur with moderate exertion, such as walking or
climbing stairs rapidly, walking uphill, walking or climbing stairs after meals, in cold or wind, under emotional
stress, or during the few hours after awakening, or walking more than two blocks on level ground, or climbing
more than one flight of ordinary stairs at a normal pace and in normal conditions.
Grade III: Marked limitation of ordinary physical activity. Angina occurs with mild exertion, such as walking
one or two blocks on level ground and climbing one flight of stairs in normal conditions and at normal pace.
Grade IV: Inability to carry on any physical activity without discomfort, anginal syndrome may be present at
rest.
Case history
Case history #1
A 50-year-old man presents with a complaint of central chest discomfort after walking for more than 5
minutes or climbing more than one flight of stairs for the past 2 weeks. The chest discomfort resolves
with rest within several minutes. He is obese, has a history of hypertension, and smokes 10 cigarettes a
day. His father died from a myocardial infarction (MI) at the age of 54 years. On examination, his blood
pressure is 144/92 mmHg with a heart rate of 82 bpm. The remainder of his exam is normal.
Case history #2
A 60-year-old man with a history of a MI presents for follow-up. He was started on aspirin, beta-blocker,
and statin therapy after his heart attack. In the past 2 weeks the patient has noted a return of chest
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Chronic coronary disease Theory
THEORY
pressure when he walks rapidly. The chest pressure resolves with sublingual nitroglycerin or a decrease
in his activity level. He is a former smoker and has modified his diet and activity to achieve his goal body
weight. He is normotensive on exam with a heart rate of 72 bpm. The remainder of his exam is normal.
Other presentations
Atypical locations of anginal pain include the epigastrium, neck, jaw, or arms. Exertional dyspnea,
fatigue, nausea, indigestion, and light-headedness are alternative symptoms sometimes called anginal
equivalents. Women, older people, and patients with diabetes may be more likely to present with atypical
angina or anginal equivalents.
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
Approach
Evaluation of a patient with suspected chronic coronary disease (CCD) typically begins with assessment of
symptoms and risk factors. Symptoms and risk factors together determine a patient's pretest probability of
CCD. Whether calculated formally using risk tables or informally with clinical judgment, pretest probability is
the basis for further diagnostic testing.[23] [24]
An important first step is to ensure that symptoms are stable. Chronic or subacute symptoms that are
intermittent and exertional are characteristic of CCD. Acute onset or rapidly progressive chest pain or
dyspnea can be signs of acute coronary syndrome or other emergent conditions. Evaluation and risk
stratification of these patients is different and usually done in emergency departments or acute care settings.
See Evaluation of chest pain .
Clinical history
Angina pectoris - chest discomfort caused by cardiac ischemia - is the cardinal symptom of coronary
disease. Patients often describe pressure, tightness, heaviness, or squeezing discomfort rather than
"pain". Angina is classically substernal although it may radiate to the neck, jaw, epigastrium, and left
or possibly right arm. It is unusual to present above the mandible, below the umbilicus, or localized to
a small area of the chest wall. Pain that is sharp, positional, or pleuritic is less characteristic. Anginal
symptoms are usually gradual in onset and last minutes rather than being fleeting or prolonged for
hours.[24]
Angina is defined by three features:
• Substernal chest discomfort of characteristic quality and duration
• Provoked by exercise or emotional stress
• Relieved with rest or nitroglycerin.
Patients with more of these features are at greater likelihood of having CCD.[65] [66] [67] However,
patients with CCD may have different or additional symptoms including anginal "equivalents", such as
dyspnea, fatigue, nausea, numbness, indigestion, and light-headedness.[24]
In the US there is evidence that women and Black, Hispanic, and South Asian patients are less likely to
receive appropriate diagnostic testing for coronary disease. Although women often experience typical
symptoms, they are also more likely to experience dyspnea, nausea, and fatigue.[24]
Chest pain has traditionally been described as "typical" if it has all three features of angina, "atypical" if it
has two, and "nonanginal" if it has one or none of the features of angina. Some guidelines avoid the term
“atypical” and instead suggest "cardiac", "possibly cardiac", and "noncardiac" pain, although symptoms
alone can not determine the cause of chest pain.[24] [68]
Physical examination
The physical examination is often normal or nonspecific in patients with stable angina but may
reveal signs of associated conditions such as heart failure (HF), valvular disease, or hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Findings suggestive of noncoronary atherosclerotic disease, such as diminished pedal
pulses, pulsatile abdominal mass, or carotid bruit, increase the likelihood of coronary disease.[65] [69]
 Presence of a rub suggests pericardial or pleural disease as the source of pain. Pain that is reproduced
by palpation of the chest reduces the likelihood of angina.[70] Fundoscopy may demonstrate presence of
increased light reflexes and arteriovenous nicking, providing evidence of hypertension and associated risk
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
of coronary disease. Elevated blood pressure, xanthomas, and retinopathy suggest the presence of risk
factors.
Initial basic testing
As part of initial workup for patients with suspected CCD, basic tests include general biochemical tests,
ECG, and imaging in some cases.
Laboratory testing:
• Blood tests should include: complete blood count, including hemoglobin to assess for anemia;
chemistries with estimation of renal function; lipid panel; screen for diabetes mellitus (fasting blood
glucose or HbA1c)
• Testing of thyroid function may be included when thyroid disease is considered a possible
contributor to angina.[23]
Resting ECG:
• ECG is recommended for all patients without an obvious noncardiac cause of chest pain.[24] It
will be normal in >50% of patients, but may reveal abnormalities such as arrhythmias, Q waves,
or ST changes that may increase the likelihood of ischemic heart disease. Furthermore, it can
determine baseline abnormalities that may preclude use of exercise ECG for noninvasive stress
testing. These include complete left bundle branch block, >1 mm of ST depression, and paced
rhythm or preexcitation syndrome. An ECG taken during an episode of chest pain may demonstrate
ST-segment depression suggestive of ischemia.[23] [71]
• ECG may reveal comorbid atrial fibrillation.
ECG showing nonspecific ST depressions in V5 and V6, which may indicate
ischemia. There are nonspecific ST-segment changes in III and aVF
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
Normal ECG
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
 
Resting echocardiography:
• European guidelines endorse echocardiography in all cases of suspected CCD.[23] It can be used
to identify prior myocardial infarction (MI); suggest alternative causes of chest symptoms; aid in
diagnosis of comorbid conditions, such as heart failure, and provide prognostic information in
patients with CCD.
• However, the value of this additional testing is not well established in patients without history, exam,
or ECG findings suggestive of a prior event (e.g., MI, transient ischemic attack) or associated
conditions (e.g., HF).
Chest x-ray:
• Usually normal in CCD, but may be considered when HF or pulmonary disease is suspected; may
reveal alternate causes of chest symptoms.
Estimating pretest probability
When the clinical evaluation is complete, the practitioner must determine whether the probability of
ischemia warrants further testing.
Pretest probability has typically been estimated from age, sex, and the clinical classification of chest
pain: typical (cardiac), atypical (possibly cardiac), or noncardiac.[72] [73] Updated pretest probabilities
using contemporary data sets also include estimates for patients presenting with dyspnea rather than
angina.[23] [67] These updated data sets suggest lower rates of CCD for most groups. It is not known
whether the lower pretest probabilities in contemporary studies are due to changes in population-level
prevention efforts (e.g., statins), patient reporting, or study design. The US and European guidelines
suggest use of the new, lower pretest probabilities.[23] [24] Guidelines also suggest adjusting the
calculated pretest probability for additional factors (e.g., family history, smoking) as well as other data that
may be available (e.g., resting ECG changes, coronary calcium score [CAC]).[23] [24] However, there is
no algorithmic way to make such adjustments. There is interest in using CAC testing as an initial screen
which might obviate further testing for patients with a CAC score of zero although this strategy has not
been endorsed in prominent guidelines.[74] Plasma biomarkers of inflammation and thrombosis have
been proposed in the risk stratification of patients with coronary disease. There is insufficient evidence
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
to support routine use of most biomarkers in risk stratification, although some guidelines recommend
selected use of c-reactive protein.[33] [44] [75]
Pretest probabilities of obstructive coronary artery disease in symptomatic
patients according to age, sex, and nature of symptoms in pooled analysis
Juarez-Orozco et al. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019 Nov 1;20(11):1198-207; used with permission
Note: typical angina indicates presence of all three features of angina (substernal chest pain/discomfort;
provoked by exercise or emotional stress; relieved with rest or nitroglycerin); atypical angina indicates
presence of two of the three features; nonanginal pain indicates presence of one or none of the features. 
The US and European guidelines recommend diagnostic testing for stable patients with a pretest
probability of 15% or higher.[23] [24] In patients at lower risk, testing may be deferred, although European
guidelines consider testing reasonable for patients with a pretest probability of 5 to 15% and US
guidelines consider select testing (CAC score or exercise ECG) reasonable for patients at lower risk. At
very low pretest probability, providers should keep in mind that a positive result is more likely to be a false
positive (low positive predictive value). 
Diagnostic testing
Tests for CCD generally can be divided into two main types: anatomic and functional. Anatomic tests
identify atherosclerosis and/or luminal narrowing in epicardial coronary arteries. Functional tests assess
myocardial function and/or perfusion at rest and during stress.
Traditionally, the only anatomic test was invasive coronary angiography and the only functional test
was noninvasive stress testing. Therefore, functional tests were usually the initial choice for stable
disease. Anatomic testing was usually second line and considered the reference standard. However,
advances in cardiac imaging now allow for noninvasive anatomic testing. In addition, new procedures in
the catheterization lab can now provide functional information as part of an invasive assessment.
These developments have prompted questions about the relative importance of total atherosclerotic
burden, focal luminal narrowing, and impaired function in CCD. Emerging research now directly compares
the ability of anatomic and functional testing to predict cardiac events and improve clinical outcomes.[76]
[77] [78] [79] [80] [81]
Noninvasive tests
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
Stress tests:
• Noninvasive functional tests, also called stress tests, remain a key diagnostic modality. Stress tests
can be further categorized by the type of stress and the outcome used to assess cardiac function/
perfusion.
• Exercise is generally preferred as a means of stress because it can provide higher levels of
physiologic stress as well as prognostically valuable information about patients' functional status.
Use of pharmacologic stress rather than exercise is typically reserved for patients unable to
perform moderate exercise due to orthopedic, pulmonary, or other comorbidities. Options for
pharmacologic stress testing include vasodilators (adenosine, dipyridamole, or regadenoson) or a
beta-agonist (dobutamine).
• The outcome measures for stress testing include ECG alone or ECG plus imaging. The most
common imaging options are echocardiography and nuclear imaging (SPECT). Positron-emission
tomography (PET) and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) may also be available. The
use of imaging as an outcome for stress testing is required when baseline ECG findings preclude
identification of inducible ischemia (such as left bundle-branch block, ventricular pacing, or baseline
ST-segment depressions ≥0.5 mm). Imaging is also usually required when a pharmacologic stress
is used. The addition of imaging to ECG stress testing provides more precise anatomic localization
as well as information about the magnitude of inducible ischemia and irreversibly infarcted tissue.
Once the decision is made to add imaging, choice of modality depends on the indication for the
test (diagnosis, risk stratification, assessment of myocardial viability), and patient-related factors
(obesity, concerns about radiation), as well as local expertise and availability. If a patient has
undergone one type of testing in the past, repeating the same test can facilitate comparison.
• Exercise ECG may have a lower sensitivity in women, although it is not clear this difference should
alter diagnostic strategy.[82] [83]
• In addition to predicting the likelihood of obstructive lesions on angiogram, functional testing can
stratify patients in relation to risk of cardiovascular mortality. The Duke treadmill score is a well-
validated model derived from the duration of exercise, ST-segment changes, and angina on a
standard treadmill exercise ECG.[84] Models with additional variables may improve the ability to
identify patients at low risk.[85] The addition of imaging to stress ECG can also add prognostic
information.[86] [87]
Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA):
• CCTA, a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) study, can identify coronary plaque
and stenosis. CCTA has advanced to achieve high concordance with invasive angiography in
identifying significant stenoses and thus offers a noninvasive anatomic test. CCTA can also identify
lesser, nonobstructive atherosclerotic lesions (as does invasive angiography). As even these
nonobstructive plaques are associated with increased cardiac risk, CCTA can add some predictive
power beyond functional testing.[88] In particular, the absence of any atherosclerosis on CCTA is
associated with very low rates of cardiovascular events for at least 5 years.[89] [90]
Choosing a noninvasive test modality
Comparing tests for CCD is complicated by verification bias, a paucity of head-to-head trials, and
uncertainty about the optimal reference standard.[91] That said, it is useful to roughly compare the ability
of noninvasive tests to predict significant stenosis on invasive angiography.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Sensitivity and specificity of tests for anatomically significant coronary artery disease
Adapted from Knuuti et al. The performance of non-invasive tests to rule-in and rule-out significant
coronary artery stenosis in patients with stable angina: a meta-analysis focused on post-test disease
probability. Eur Heart J. 2018 Sep 14;39(35):3322-30; used with permission. (CCTA, coronary computed
tomography angiography; CI, confidence interval; CMR, stress cardiac magnetic resonance; PET,
positron emission tomography; SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography [exercise stress
SPECT with or without dipyridamole or adenosine]; Stress echo, exercise stress echocardiography)
For initial diagnosis, current US and European guidelines recommend either CCTA or stress testing
with imaging. Exercise ECG has a limited role.[23] [24] UK guidelines emphasize CCTA as the initial
diagnostic test for CCD and advise against exercise ECG.[92] [93]
Use of CCTA as an initial diagnostic test is likely to identify patients with subclinical atherosclerosis
that would not be identified on functional testing. The risks and benefits of this approach have not
been fully defined. A major US trial randomizing patients to functional testing versus CCTA showed an
increased rate of invasive catheterization in the CCTA group but no difference in clinical outcomes.[76] A
Scottish randomized trial adding CCTA to routine care (including exercise ECG for most patients) showed
increased rates of preventative and symptomatic CCD treatments with no difference in overall rates of
angiography or revascularization at 5 years.[94] There may be advantages to using CCTA for younger,
lower-intermediate risk patients and stress testing for older, higher-risk patients. However, local expertise,
availability, as well as patient specific factors may weigh heavily in the choice between CCTA and stress
testing with imaging.
Invasive tests
Coronary angiography:
• Coronary angiography uses catheters to inject contrast directly into epicardial coronary arteries,
providing visualization of the artery lumen and degree of stenosis.
• Risks of invasive angiography include those from contrast and radiation, thrombosis or hemorrhage
related to vascular access, arrhythmia, and atheroembolism.
• Traditionally, lesions causing stenosis greater than 50% to 70% are considered significant, although
the presence of lesser degrees of stenosis are also associated with worse cardiac outcomes.[95]
 Because of the variability in length and irregularity of plaques, estimates of the degree of stenosis
may be imperfect, and measurements of luminal narrowing do not necessarily correlate with the
level of symptomatic or functional impairment.[96]
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
• One of several techniques to overcome the limits of conventional angiography, fractional flow
reserve (FFR) is increasingly used to guide decisions about procedural intervention. FFR - the
direct measurement of pressure gradients across a stenosis after administration of adenosine -
provides functional information about blood flow with a pharmacologic stress. It correlates with
stress testing in small studies and predicts the likelihood of future cardiac events.[97] [98]
Emerging tests
Coronary artery calcium (CAC) scoring:
• CAC scoring can identify the overall burden of calcified atherosclerosis without characterizing the
severity of specific stenoses.
• Guidelines endorse a limited role for CAC testing in risk stratification for asymptomatic patients
considering interventions for primary prevention of coronary disease. It can be used, for
example, in combination with clinical markers in deciding whether to initiate a statin for primary
prevention.[44] [99]
• There are currently no trials evaluating the use of CAC testing to intensify or de-escalate primary
prevention. Guidelines also suggest CAC testing can be considered for risk stratification of stable
patients with symptoms and low pretest probability of disease such that no other diagnostic testing
would be indicated.[24] [100]
• For symptomatic patients, an existing CAC score may be incorporated into calculation of a pretest
probability to determine whether further diagnostic testing is indicated.[23] [24] [100] Some have
proposed using CAC testing as an initial screen for symptomatic patients being evaluated for CCD.
The suggestion is that a CAC score of zero might obviate further testing.[74] However, this strategy
has not been endorsed in prominent guidelines. Not all atheromatous plaques are calcified, and
especially in younger, symptomatic patients a negative CAC score may not effectively rule out
CCD.[101] [102]
• Avoid obtaining a CAC score in patients with known atherosclerotic disease as it offers little
additional prognostic value for patients with known disease.[24][103] [104] [105]
CT myocardial perfusion (CTP) and fractional flow reserve CT (FFRCT):
• Emerging CT technologies aim to add functional information to the anatomic data provided by
CCTA. CTP and FFRCT both appear to increase specificity of CCTA with a small loss of sensitivity,
although variations in test protocol produce slightly different results.[106] [107] [108] 
Tests for vasospasm and microcirculatory dysfunction:
• Some patients have symptoms consistent with angina but lack the classic stenosis of epicardial
coronary arteries. For these patients, invasive and noninvasive testing for vasospasm and
microcirculatory dysfunction can be considered.[23] [24]
• Limited evidence shows improved symptoms with tailored therapy.[25]
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
typical angina symptoms (common)
• Typical angina is 1) chest pressure or squeezing lasting several minutes, 2) provoked by exercise or
emotional stress, and 3) relieved by rest or nitroglycerine. This symptom complex is most consistently
associated with coronary disease.[65] [66]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
atypical angina symptoms (common)
• Atypical angina is defined as chest discomfort with only two characteristics of typical angina. It is
less predictive of coronary disease than typical angina, but may be more frequent in women, people
with diabetes, or older people.[109] [110] [111] [112] Some guidelines avoid the term “atypical” and
instead suggest "cardiac", "possibly cardiac", and "noncardiac" pain, although symptoms alone can not
determine the cause of chest pain. 
symptoms of low-risk unstable angina (common)
• Features of low-risk unstable angina include pain from exertion lasting less than 20 minutes, pain not
rapidly increasing, and normal/unchanged ECG.
normal exam (common)
• Typically, normal in chronic stable angina.
Other diagnostic factors
known medical history of exacerbating factor (common)
• As anginal pain results from an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and myocardial oxygen
demand, patient history should also be evaluated for problems that may exacerbate this imbalance.
Thyroid disease, anemia, hyperviscosity syndrome, arteriovenous fistula, and underlying lung disease
are known exacerbating factors.
nonanginal chest pain (common)
• Nonanginal chest pain is defined as chest discomfort with only one or none of the characteristics of
typical angina. It is less predictive of coronary disease than typical or atypical angina, but should be
evaluated with consideration of the patient's age and other risk factors.[65] [69]
epigastric discomfort (uncommon)
• An alternate location for anginal discomfort, more commonly in women, people with diabetes, or older
people.
jaw pain (uncommon)
• An alternate location for anginal discomfort.
arm pain (uncommon)
• An alternate location for anginal discomfort, more commonly the left arm.
dyspnea on exertion (uncommon)
• May suggest exercise-induced left ventricular dysfunction; coronary disease should be considered
among the differential diagnosis in this setting. It may be an anginal equivalent (e.g., in patients with
diabetes). Additionally, dyspnea may suggest underlying lung disease or anemia that can contribute to
anginal symptoms.
nausea/vomiting (uncommon)
• May be associated with angina.
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
perspiration (diaphoresis) (uncommon)
• May be associated with angina, but should also raise suspicion for illicit drug use (cocaine) or
thyrotoxicosis.
fatigue (uncommon)
• May be associated with angina, but should also raise suspicion for anemia.
hypoxia (uncommon)
• Hypoxia may exacerbate anginal symptoms as a result of poor oxygen delivery to ischemic
myocardium. Evaluation for underlying pulmonary processes should be considered.
tachycardia (uncommon)
• Tachycardia should raise suspicion for alternate or exacerbating causes of angina, including
thyrotoxicosis, anemia, sympathomimetic drug use, arteriovenous fistula, or primary atrial or ventricular
tachycardia.
S3 (uncommon)
• If present in the setting of chest discomfort, this suggests ischemia-induced left ventricular dysfunction
and high-risk coronary disease.[70]
mitral regurgitation murmur (uncommon)
• If present in the setting of chest discomfort, this suggests ischemia-induced papillary muscle
dysfunction.[70]
bibasilar rales (uncommon)
• If present in the setting of chest discomfort, this suggests ischemia-induced left ventricular dysfunction
and high-risk coronary disease.
aortic outflow murmur (uncommon)
• This suggests aortic stenosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy as an alternate etiology of anginal
pain.[24]
carotid bruit (uncommon)
• Presence of peripheral vascular disease increases the likelihood of atherosclerotic coronary
disease.[72]
diminished peripheral pulses (uncommon)
• Presence of peripheral vascular disease increases the likelihood of atherosclerotic coronary disease.
signs of abdominal aortic aneurysm (uncommon)
• Presence of peripheral vascular disease increases the likelihood of atherosclerotic coronary disease.
retinopathy seen on fundoscopic examination (uncommon)
• Presence of increased light reflexes and arteriovenous nicking provide evidence of hypertension and
associated risk of coronary disease.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
xanthomas or xanthelasma (uncommon)
• Presence of xanthomas or xanthelasma suggests severe hypercholesterolemia.
Risk factors
Strong
age and sex
• Advancing age is the single most powerful risk factor for coronary disease in both men and women.
Those older than age 70 years are often at very high-risk even without other risk factors.[33] There is
a male predominance. In female patients risk rises more slowly before menopause and more rapidly
thereafter.[9]
smoking
• Aside from age, cigarette smoking is the most important risk factor for coronary disease. In the case-
control INTERHEART study, smoking accounted for 36% of global risk for myocardial infarction. Risk
was dose-dependent and started at as little as 1 to 5 cigarettes per day.[34] Risks of other combustible
and noncombustible nicotine products are less clearly defined.
hypertension
• Hypertension is an important risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD) and a common comorbidity
in patients with CCD. There is robust observational evidence of a linear association between systolic
and diastolic blood pressure and coronary disease mortality.[35] Randomized controlled trials support
the benefit of blood pressure control in reducing ischemic heart disease outcomes.[36] [37]
dyslipidemia
• Numerous lipid measures are predictive of cardiovascular risk. Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
cholesterol is a key risk factor in the causal pathway for atherosclerosis. Alternative measures
(e.g., non-high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol) or specific lipoproteins (e.g., apolipoprotein B,
lipoprotein(a)) may provide additional and overlapping prognostic information.[33] Other traditional lipid
measures associated with risk of coronary disease include low HDL cholesterol and high triglycerides,
although it is not clear these factors are in the causal pathway nor key targets for pharmacotherapy.
diabetes
• Individuals with diabetes mellitus have a 2- to 4-fold increased risk for CCD.[38] [39] CCD and
diabetes are common comorbidities, and both are associated with obesity, dyslipidemia, and
hypertension. Coronary artery disease is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in people with
type 2 diabetes mellitus.[40]
inactivity
• Observational studies have demonstrated a strong association between levels of physical activity and
rates of CVD.[34] [41]
diet
• Diets low in fresh fruits and vegetables are associated with coronary disease.[26] [34]
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
race, ethnicity, geography
• Risks of coronary disease vary between and within racial and ethnic groups. Prevalence of ischemic
heart disease varies both between and within countries.[4] [11] [12] The differences are likely mediated
largely by environmental and behavioral factors including social determinants of health.
psychosocial factors and social determinants of health
• A psychosocial index including depression, stress, life events, and sense of control is predictive of
coronary events.[34] Additional relevant social determinants of coronary health include education,
access to care, and social vulnerability.[26]
chronic kidney disease (CKD)
• CKD is a risk factor for CVD, independent of comorbidities such as diabetes, hypertension,
and dyslipidemia. Worsening kidney function (lower glomerular filtration rate (GFR), increased
albuminuria) is associated with progressively increased risk of coronary disease.[42] A new concept
of cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic (CKM) syndrome reflects the connections between CVD, kidney
disease, and metabolic disease (obesity, diabetes, metabolic syndrome), as well as the social
determinants of health that often underlie them.[43]
inflammatory and other diseases
• HIV and other inflammatory disease (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis) are risk factors for coronary
disease.[33] [44] Cancer and coronary disease are commonly comorbid conditions, and a cancer
diagnosis is associated with a worse prognosis in patients with coronary disease.[45] Cancer
treatments such as chest radiation and selected cancer chemotherapies also increase risk.[46] [47]
obesity
• Body mass index (BMI) and waist circumference (a measure of central adiposity) are associated with
coronary disease. It is unclear the extent to which risk associated with overweight and obesity are
independent or reflective of factors such as blood pressure, lipids, insulin resistance, physical activity,
and diet. BMI in particular has known limits in predicting individual risk and may need to be applied in
the context of demographic factors including, age, sex, gender, race, and ethnicity.[48] [49] [50]
substance misuse
• Use of sympathomimetic agents (e.g., cocaine, amphetamines) contributes to coronary disease.[51]
[52] Current evidence is not consistent with a putative protective role for alcohol in coronary
disease.[26]
family history of coronary disease
• Family history is a risk factor for coronary disease but adds little prognostic information when
combined with other common risk factors.[34] This finding suggests that whether through genes or
shared lifestyle, much of the effect of family history is mediated through known risk factors including
hyperlipidemia, hypertension, diabetes, obesity, smoking, and diet.
pollution
• Particulate air pollution is associated with increased coronary disease prevalence, events, and
death.[53] [54] [55] [56] [57] Exposure to toxic metal pollutants, such as mercury, lead, arsenic, and
cadmium has also been associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease.[55]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
resting ECG
• Resting ECG is appropriate for initial evaluation of all patients with
known or suspected coronary disease.[24]
• In addition to providing diagnostic and prognostic information, the
presence of baseline ECG abnormalities may also guide use of
further testing such as echocardiography and stress testing.
ECG showing nonspecific ST depressions in V5
and V6, which may indicate ischemia. There are
nonspecific ST-segment changes in III and aVF
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
Normal ECG
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
ECG may also reveal comorbid atrial fibrillation.
often normal, but may
reveal ST-T changes
suggestive of ischemia
or Q waves indicative of
prior infarction
hemoglobin
• Anemia results in additional cardiac workload and reduced oxygen
delivery to the heart, which can exacerbate angina. Severe anemia
may cause angina without obstructive coronary lesions.[23]
reduced in anemia
lipid profile
• Dyslipidemia is an important risk factor for coronary disease.
elevated LDL cholesterol
is associated with
increased risk; elevated
HDL is protective
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
Test Result
fasting blood glucose or HbA1c
• Diabetes is an important risk factor for coronary disease and a
common comorbidity.
elevated in diabetes
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Other tests to consider
Test Result
coronary CT angiography (CCTA)
• CCTA has high sensitivity and specificity and an increasing
evidence base for prognosis and risk stratification. Severe coronary
calcification can limit diagnostic quality. Risks are primarily related
to contrast and radiation, although administration of beta-blockers or
nitrates may also be required during the test.
• For initial diagnosis, current US and European guidelines recommend
either CCTA or stress testing with imaging. Exercise ECG has a
limited role.[23] [24] UK guidelines emphasize CCTA as the initial
diagnostic test for chronic coronary disease and advise against
exercise ECG.[92] [93]
typically luminal
narrowing of >50% is
considered positive,
although the presence
of lesser lesions
is prognostically
relevant; identification
of "soft plaques" is also
considered positive
exercise or pharmacologic stress with imaging
• Imaging options include single photon emission CT (SPECT),
echocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR), and positron-
emission tomography (PET).
• Imaging identifies the extent and distribution of inducible ischemia or
irreversible infarct. The difference in summed scores for perfusion/
wall motion from rest to stress adds prognostic information from ECG
which is also recorded.
• The addition of imaging improves sensitivity and perhaps specificity
over exercise ECG. Imaging is required when patients' baseline
ECG precludes the detection of ischemia or when a pharmacologic
rather than exercise stress is used. Stress testing with imaging is also
used for prognosis or to guide revascularization decisions in patients
with known chronic coronary disease (CCD). Risks include inducing
cardiac stress and (for SPECT and PET) the use of radiation.
• Choice of imaging modality may be influenced by patient factors,
and the exact questions being asked, as well as local availability
and expertise. Stress echocardiography and SPECT are the best
studied and most available. Echocardiography provides more detailed
information about cardiac anatomy but is more operator dependent.
US guidelines suggest a possible preference for PET over SPECT
due to fewer nondiagnostic studies.[24]
• For initial diagnosis, current US and European guidelines recommend
either CCTA or stress testing with imaging. Exercise ECG has a
limited role.[23] [24] UK guidelines emphasize CCTA as the initial
diagnostic test for CCD and advise against exercise ECG.[92] [93]
ST-segment elevation and
depression on the ECG
identify ischemia, as do
wall motion or perfusion
abnormalities on the
imaging component
exercise ECG (without imaging)
• Patients use a treadmill, stationary cycle, or other device at
increasing levels of speed and resistance while under medical
supervision. In addition to ECG before, during, and in recovery from
exercise, interpretation should include exercise capacity and heart
rate achieved, as well as symptoms and hemodynamic response
during and after exercise.
• Scores such as the Duke treadmill score aid in determination of
cardiac risk.
• Risks are primarily related to inducing cardiac stress.
• Not routinely recommended in European, UK or current US
guidelines.[23] [24] [92] [93]
• Inappropriate for patients with baseline ECGs that make
interpretation of exercise ST-segment changes difficult (left bundle
ST-segment elevation
and depression identify
ischemia
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
Test Result
branch block, baseline ST depression >1 mm, paced rhythm, digitalis
use, preexcitation).
• Inappropriate for patients who have limited exercise capacity (i.e.,
<4-5 METS) due to poor conditioning, obesity, physical impairments,
or coexisting illness.[24]
Baseline exercise ECG in a 55-year-old man
with a 1-month history of angina on exertion
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
Maximal exercise ECG in a 55-year-old man with a 1-month history
of angina on exertion with ST depressions in II, III, aVF diagnostic
of ischemia, and normal ST changes in V4-6 (rapid upsloping)
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
Computerized summary of exercise ECG in a 55-year-
old man with a 1-month history of angina on exertion
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
invasive coronary angiography
• Coronary angiography is the conventional reference standard for
diagnosis of coronary artery disease. Angiography also provides
details about the overall coronary anatomy. Fractional flow reserve
(FFR) is increasingly used to clarify the functional significance of
stenoses, particularly when intervention is being considered without
prior functional testing.
• Risks include the use of radiation and administration of contrast,
as well as thrombosis or hemorrhage related to vascular access,
arrhythmia, and atheroembolism.
• Invasive angiography is not typically used for initial diagnosis
of chronic coronary disease, although in patients with a high
pretest probability it may be used for confirmation of the diagnosis,
risk stratification, and to identify appropriate candidates for
revascularization. It may also be used for diagnosis when initial
noninvasive testing is inconclusive.[24]
50% to 70% luminal
diameter narrowing is
considered coronary
obstruction, although
presence of lesser lesions
is prognostically relevant
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
Test Result
Angiogram (right anterior oblique caudal projection) in
a 55-year-old man with a 1-month history of angina on
exertion. A 90% proximal stenosis of obtuse marginal
1 is present, explaining the patient's lateral ischemia
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
Angiogram (right anterior oblique cranial projection) in a 55-year-
old man with a 1-month history of angina on exertion. The image
shows a 90% proximal stenosis of obtuse marginal 1 (explaining
the patient's lateral ischemia), 90% proximal stenosis of the first
diagonal, and 99% subtotal occlusion of the second diagonal
(explaining the patient's anterior and anterolateral ischemia)
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
thyroid function tests
• Testing of thyroid function may be included when thyroid disease is
considered a possible contributor to angina.[23]
below normal range
(hyperthyroidism);
elevated (hypothyroidism)
CXR
• X-ray may reveal alternate causes of chest symptoms.
usually normal in chronic
coronary disease
rest echocardiography
• European guidelines recommend routine echocardiography in
patients with known or suspected CCD.[23] It can be used to identify
prior MI; suggest alternative causes of chest symptoms; aid in
diagnosis of comorbid conditions, such as heart failure, and provide
prognostic information in patients with CCD. However, the value of
this additional testing is not well established in patients without a
history, exam, or ECG findings suggestive of prior event or associated
condition.
often normal in chronic
coronary disease
(CCD); focal wall motion
abnormalities may
indicate prior myocardial
infarction (MI) and the
extent of any impact on
cardiac function; other
findings may indicate
alternative valvular,
myocardial, or pericardial
causes of chest symptoms
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
Emerging tests
Test Result
CT myocardial perfusion (CTP) and fractional flow reserve CT
(FFRCT)
• Both techniques add to coronary CT angiography and are
designed to improve specificity by identifying functionally significant
stenoses.[106] [107] [113]
• CTP assesses myocardial uptake of contrast on CT scans with and
without a pharmacologic stress. FFRCT uses computational fluid
dynamics to assess flow in vessels based on data from coronary CT
angiography without a pharmacologic stress phase.
CTP shows perfusion
in areas of myocardium,
FFRCT shows flow in
vessels
coronary artery calcium (CAC) scoring
• Calcium scoring can identify the overall burden of calcified
atherosclerosis without characterizing the severity of specific
stenoses. The test involves radiation but no contrast or induced
cardiac stress. CAC scoring does not play a significant role in workup
of chest pain or dyspnea. CAC is recommended for risk stratification
in select asymptomatic patients considering interventions for
primary prevention of coronary disease, such as initiating a statin
medication.[44] [99]
• For symptomatic patients, an existing CAC score may be
incorporated into calculation of a pretest probability to determine
whether further diagnostic testing is indicated.[23] [24] [100]
• However, do not use CAC scoring in patients with known
atherosclerotic disease, including those with stents and bypass
grafts, as it offers limited incremental prognostic value for patients
with known disease.[24][103] [104] [105]
overall calcification is
usually reported in ranges
from 0 to >400
tests for vasospasm and microcirculatory dysfunction
• Some patients have symptoms consistent with angina but lack
the classic stenosis of epicardial coronary arteries. Patients
with nonexertional symptoms suggestive of vasospastic angina
may undergo ambulatory ECG monitoring and/or intracoronary
acetylcholine testing. Patients with mixed exertional and
nonexertional symptoms suggestive of microvascular dysfunction
may undergo invasive or noninvasive assessment of coronary flow
reserve and microcirculatory resistance as well as intracoronary
acetylcholine testing.[23] Limited evidence shows improved
symptoms with tailored therapy.[25] 
may show arteriolar
dysregulation
or increased
microcirculatory
resistance
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Pneumonia with pleurisy • Pleurisy results in localized
chest pain that is worsened
by deep breathing.[114]
• In the setting of pneumonia,
patients will commonly
complain of dyspnea,
fevers, cough, and sputum
production.
• On exam, bronchial breath
sounds and dullness
to percussion may be
appreciated in focal lung
region.
• A pulmonary infiltrate with
or without an effusion is
typically seen on chest
radiograph.
Esophagitis • Dysphagia and odynophagia
are the predominant
complaints of esophagitis.
• Infectious esophagitis
typically occurs in
immunocompromised
patients.[115]
• Medications should be
reviewed for common
offenders of pill-induced
esophagitis.[116]
• History of radiation therapy
may raise suspicion for
radiation esophagitis.
• The results of barium
swallow and endoscopy are
dependent on the cause of
esophagitis.
• Candida albicans  will
appear as a shaggy mucosa
on barium swallow and
numerous small white-yellow
plaques on endoscopy.
• Herpes simplex virus
appears as small ulcers
on barium swallow and
esophagogastroduodenoscopy,
whereas large, deep,
and linear ulcers suggest
cytomegalovirus.[115]
• In suspected pill esophagitis,
endoscopy may be indicated
to exclude infectious
causes.[116]
• Barium swallow and
endoscopy can demonstrate
the severity of mucosal
damage with radiation
esophagitis.
Esophageal spasm • Patients may complain of
intermittent chest pain and
dysphagia in the setting
of esophageal spasm.
Nitroglycerin can improve
esophageal spasm by
inducing smooth muscle
relaxation.[117] This can
make esophageal spasm
difficult to differentiate from
angina.
• Barium swallow may show
prominent nonpropulsive
contractions leading to a
corkscrew appearance.
• Esophageal manometry
may demonstrate
repetitive and aperistaltic
contractions.[117]
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
GERD • Esophageal reflux typically
presents as an epigastric
or retrosternal burning pain,
with radiation toward the
throat. Patients may report
resolution of the pain with a
trial of antacids.[118]
• Typically managed
empirically with acid-
suppressive therapy.
Esophageal pH monitoring
can be performed to
demonstrate episodes in
which the esophageal pH
drops to below 4.[118]
Biliary colic • The pain of biliary colic is
localized to the right upper
quadrant, occurring 15 to
30 minutes after a meal
and persisting for 3 to 4
hours. It is often associated
with nausea, vomiting, and
bloating.[119] [120] [121]
• Ultrasound or hepatobiliary
iminodiacetic acid scan will
reveal gallstones.[119]
Peptic ulcer disease • Recurrent episodes of pain
in the epigastrium with
radiation to the back are
common in peptic ulcer
disease. The pain may
temporarily improve with
ingestion of food.[122]
• Esophagoduodenoscopy:
visualization of ulceration
in the gastric or duodenal
mucosa.[122]
Costochondritis • The pain of costochondritis
is typically localized to one
or more of the costochondral
or costosternal junctions,
with reproduction of the pain
on palpation.
• Diagnosed solely on
reproduction of the pain
with palpation of the tender
areas.
Fibromyalgia • Tender points of fibromyalgia
can be located to near
the sternum along the
second intercostal space.
Additionally, patients may
complain of fatigue and
chest heaviness. Patients
with fibromyalgia will typically
have multiple additional
tender points localized to the
neck, buttocks, shoulders,
arms, and upper back.[123]
• Diagnosis is on clinical
grounds by identifying
point tenderness areas
(typically, patients will
have at least 11 of the 18
classic tender points) with
no accompanying tissue
swelling or inflammation, and
by excluding other medical
conditions as a cause.[123]
Rib fracture • Rib fractures are often
preceded by a history of
traumatic injury to the area
and pain is often localized to
the area of fracture.
• Chest radiograph may show
rib fractures. Pain with
palpation of the tender area
also suggests the diagnosis.
Sternoclavicular arthritis • The pain of sternoclavicular
arthritis is usually maximal
immediately over the
• Diagnosis is usually
on clinical grounds
as the joint is poorly
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Chronic coronary disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
sternoclavicular joint. A
history of osteoarthritis,
rheumatoid arthritis,
ankylosing spondylitis, or
psoriatic arthritis should
raise suspicion for this
diagnosis.[124]
visualized by conventional
radiography.[124]
Herpes zoster virus
infection
• The majority of patients
with herpes zoster will
have a prodromal pain
in the dermatome that
will become affected.
Before the development of
vesicles, it can be difficult to
differentiate this chest pain
from other causes of chest
pain.[125]
• Dermatomal distribution and
presence of vesicular skin
lesions.[125]
Anxiety disorders and
panic attacks
• The increased tension and
autonomic hyperactivity of
anxiety disorders and panic
attacks may lead to feelings
of fatigue, muscle aches,
palpitations, and chest pain
that may lead to concern of
heart disease.[126] [127]
• Diagnosis is on clinical
grounds.
Screening
Screening of asymptomatic patients for coronary disease is not recommended. However, all adults should
be routinely screened for cardiovascular risk factors including smoking, dyslipidemia, hypertension,
diabetes, overweight and obesity, physical inactivity, unhealthy diet, and family history of premature coronary
disease. Calculated estimates of patients' 10-year risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease may guide
implementation of some preventive interventions such as medications for dyslipidemia.  [SCORE2 and
SCORE2-OP risk assessment models] (https://www.escardio.org/Education/Practice-Tools/CVD-prevention-
toolbox/SCORE-Risk-Charts)   In select cases, testing such as CAC score may be reasonable to refine risk
stratification.[18] [33]
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Approach
General approach
The treatment goals of patients with chronic coronary disease (CCD) are to:
• Improve quality of life by eliminating or reducing symptoms and restoring level of activity
• Improve outcomes by reducing complications including myocardial infarction (MI) and death.
A multidisciplinary team approach that involves the patient in shared decision-making is recommended.
Education and lifestyle modification
Patients with CCD should have an individualized education plan to optimize care and promote wellness.
It is important to educate patients on the importance of medication adherence for managing symptoms
and retarding disease progression.[26] The patient should be made aware of medication management
strategies that reduce cardiovascular risk in a manner that respects his or her level of understanding,
reading comprehension, and culture. The patient and provider together should review all therapeutic
options including a discussion of appropriate levels of exercise, with encouragement to maintain
recommended levels of daily physical activity, self-monitoring skills, and information on how to recognize
worsening cardiovascular symptoms and how to take appropriate action.
Cardiac rehabilitation
• Cardiac rehabilitation is a multidisciplinary approach that combines assessment, education,
assistance with lifestyle modification, psychosocial support, and supervised exercise. Guidelines
recommend cardiac rehabilitation after MI and revascularization as well as for patients with
stable angina. Benefits after infarction or revascularization include reduced mortality, reduced
rehospitalization and quality of life. Patients with angina experience primarily symptomatic
benefit.[23] [26][137]  There is developing evidence to support home-based alternatives to facility-
based programs.[138] [139] [140]
Physical activity
• Exercise recommendations for patients with CCD are similar to those in the general population:
at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity, such as brisk walking, per week or at
least 75 minutes of higher-intensity aerobic activity. In addition, strength (resistance) training is
recommended at least 2 days a week.[141] Formal exercise may be supplemented by an increase
in lifestyle activities (e.g., walking breaks at work, using the stairs, gardening, household work) to
improve cardiorespiratory fitness.[26] Although patients with CCD should generally be encouraged
regarding the benefits of exercise, high-risk patients may benefit from a basic evaluation to rule out
unstable angina or other contraindications. Selective use of stress testing may be considered for
sedentary patients with CCD prior to initiation of vigorous exercise.[23]
Diet
• A Mediterranean-type diet, with a higher intake of vegetables, fruits, legumes, nuts, whole grains,
and lean protein (e.g., fish) is recommended.[23] [26][142] Intake of saturated fats should be
reduced and replaced with unsaturated fats, complex carbohydrates, and fiber. Intake of processed
meat, refined carbohydrates, and sweetened drinks should be minimized or avoided. Sodium intake
should be minimized and trans fat should be avoided.[23] [26][143]
• When consumed, alcohol should be limited.[23] [26]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
• There is insufficient evidence to recommend use of dietary supplements, including omega-3 fatty
acids.[26] [144] [145]
Weight management
• Guidelines recommend routine assessment of body mass index (BMI) with or without waist
circumference in patients with CCD. For those with overweight or obesity, counseling on weight
loss, with goals including reducing body weight with diet and physical activity, is advised.[23] [26]
 Guidelines further advise consideration of pharmacologic therapy and bariatric surgery in selected
patients.[26]
• Although weight loss interventions improve cardiovascular risk factors (including weight, blood
pressure, lipids, insulin resistance) there is limited evidence of improved cardiovascular outcomes
in weight loss trials.[48] Given the imperfections of BMI as a risk marker, the limited efficacy of even
multicomponent lifestyle interventions in promoting sustained weight loss, and concern for weight
stigma as a barrier to care, providers might also focus on physical activity and cardiorespiratory
fitness rather than weight per se as a treatment goal.
• See Obesity in adults .
Smoking cessation
• Smoking cessation and avoidance of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke at work and
home should be encouraged for all patients with coronary disease. Follow-up, referral to special
programs, and pharmacotherapy are recommended, as is a stepwise strategy for smoking
cessation.[26] See Smoking cessation .
• Observational studies show that smoking cessation is associated with a greater than one third
reduction in coronary disease mortality.[146] The benefits appear within a few years. After 10 to
15 years of abstinence, risk is similar to or minimally higher than that of people who have never
smoked.[147] One Cochrane review found that in people with coronary disease, stopping smoking
at diagnosis is associated with a reduction of approximately one‐third in the risk of recurrent
cardiovascular disease.[148]
Stress and depression recognition and management
• Depression is common in patients with CCD, particularly after acute infarction. It is associated
with worse health behaviors and possibly worse cardiovascular outcomes.[149] Evidence on the
cardiac effects of depression treatment is limited, but it is reasonable to screen patients and treat
as indicated.[23] [26][150]
Vaccine recommendations
• Influenza infection is associated with adverse cardiovascular events such acute MI, and there is
strong evidence that vaccination of patients with CCD can reduce those outcomes.[151] [152] [153]
[154] The effect of other vaccines (e.g., COVID-19, pneumococcus, RSV) on cardiac outcomes is
less well defined, but patients with CCD may be at increased risk of serious complications from
these infections.[23] [26][155] [156]
Guideline-directed management to improve outcomes
Guideline-directed therapy is recommended where indicated to reduce risk of cardiovascular events.
Treatments with the strongest evidence and widest applicability are:
• Low-dose aspirin
• High-intensity statins
Select patients may also benefit from:
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
• Beta-blockers
• Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone antagonists
• Additional or alternative antiplatelet or anticoagulant medications
• Additional lipid management
• Blood pressure control
• Diabetes management.
Low-dose aspirin
• Antiplatelet therapy protects against platelet activation and acute thrombosis, and thereby reduces
the risk of MI and sudden death.
• Low-dose aspirin should be prescribed indefinitely in most patients with coronary disease, although
European guidelines make a less strong recommendation for patients with CCD without prior
infarction or revascularization.[23] [26] Aspirin reduces the relative risk of nonfatal MI by 20%.[157]
 Aspirin for secondary prevention is frequently underused.[158]
• Low doses of aspirin are as effective as higher doses and have a lower risk of gastrointestinal,
major, and life-threatening bleeding.[159] [160] In a large pragmatic trial outcomes were similar but
42% of patients assigned to high-dose aspirin switched to low-dose.[161]
Additional/alternative antiplatelet and anticoagulant medications
• Clopidogrel is at least as effective as aspirin in reducing vascular events.[162] However, its use as
monotherapy is generally reserved for patients with contraindications to aspirin.[23] [26]
• Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) - the use of aspirin combined with P2Y12-receptor inhibitors such
as clopidogrel - increases the risk of bleeding and is not universally beneficial for patients with
CCD.[26] [163] [164] [165] European, but not US, guidelines endorse consideration of long-term
DAPT for patients with particularly high risk of ischemic events but not high risk of bleeding.[23]
• After an episode of acute coronary syndrome (ACS), US and European guidelines recommend
DAPT for 1 year. This recommendation applies whether the ACS is treated medically or
percutaneously, or surgically. Shorter or longer durations of DAPT may be reasonable in patients
at high or low bleeding risk, respectively. Outside of the acute preprocedural period, clopidogrel
is recommended in all scenarios; alternative P2Y12 inhibitors may be appropriate in selected
cases.[165] [166]
• After percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), DAPT can prevent the rare but morbid complication
of in-stent thrombosis as well as reduce the risk of MI unrelated to the stent. US guidelines
recommend 6 months of DAPT following placement of contemporary drug-eluting stents and 1
month of DAPT following placement of a bare metal stent. European guidelines recommend 6
months of DAPT regardless of stent type. Both guidelines acknowledge that shorter or longer
duration of DAPT may be reasonable depending on bleeding risk.[165] [166]
• Scoring systems (such as Precise DAPT or the American College of Cardiology DAPT risk
calculator) can assist clinicians in weighing the antithrombotic benefit and bleeding risk of extended
DAPT.
• DAPT poses markedly increased bleeding risk in patients taking vitamin K antagonists or direct oral
anticoagulants (DOAC). For patients taking anticoagulation for indications such as atrial fibrillation
(AF), mechanical heart valves, or venous thromboembolism, triple therapy is generally avoided or
used for as short a period as possible.[26] [165] [166]
• European guidelines recommend routine use of proton-pump inhibitors (PPI) with DAPT to reduce
the risk of gastrointestinal hemorrhage.[166] US guidelines recommend selective use.[26] [165]
 Despite concerns, trials have not shown that PPIs reduce the efficacy of clopidogrel.[167]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
• For selected patients with CCD at high-risk of ischemic events but low-risk of bleeding who
do not have a separate indication for anticoagulation, the addition of low-dose rivaroxaban to
aspirin monotherapy can reduce a combined cardiovascular outcome. The benefit is primarily
reduced stroke and peripheral arterial disease rather than MI and comes at the cost of increased
bleeding.[26] [168]
Statins and other lipid-lowering medications
• High-intensity statins are the mainstay of lipid pharmacotherapy and appropriate for all patients with
CCD (unless clearly contraindicated), regardless of baseline low-density lipoprotein (LDL). High-
intensity statin therapy is indicated for most patients.[26] [63][99]
• Meta-analysis of placebo-controlled and higher-versus-lower dose trials show that statin therapy
reduces coronary death and nonfatal MIs regardless of baseline LDL cholesterol. In placebo-
controlled trials, lower-potency statins reduce the relative risk of these major coronary events by
27%. Although there have not been large placebo-controlled studies of high-potency statins in the
CCD population, the degree of benefit appears proportional to the intensity of statin therapy, with a
relative reduction of major coronary events of approximately 25% per 40 mg/dL reduction in LDL-
cholesterol achieved.[169] On the basis of these data, some authorities suggest approximating the
benefit of statin therapy as a relative risk reduction of 1% for each 1% reduction in LDL achieved,
more for higher baseline LDL and less for lower baseline LDL.[44]
• Statins, particularly high-dose statins, have been less well studied in patients aged over 75 years
but meta-analysis suggests similar efficacy for patients with existing vascular disease irrespective
of age.[170]
• Statins are usually well tolerated. Serious adverse events including liver injury, myonecrosis, and
rhabdomyolysis are rare.[171]
• When patients develop possible adverse effects, such as myalgias, every effort should be
undertaken to ascertain whether these are actually related to the medication. Alternative statins,
lower doses, or alternative dosing schedules may be tried.
• Despite few treat-to-target trials of lipid management, US and European guidelines recommend
achieving a reduction of at least 50% from baseline LDL.[44] [99] [172] In addition, particularly for
patients with CCD at very high-risk, guidelines recommend an absolute LDL value below 70 mg/
dL (1.81 mmol/L), or in some cases even lower.[44] [99] If these reductions are not achieved with
lifestyle modification and statin therapy, additional medications can be indicated.
• The evidence supporting statin therapy in CCD far exceeds that of other lipid-lowering medications.
However, for patients unable to take statins, or who have a less than expected reduction in LDL
despite adherence at the highest tolerated dose, ezetimibe monotherapy or combination therapy
with ezetimibe and a statin may be considered.[26][44] For patients at very high risk with persisting
elevations in LDL, a proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitor may be added
(although cost may remain a barrier). Newer nonstatin therapies are approved (e.g., bempedoic
acid, inclisiran); however, until there is evidence of improved cardiac outcomes use cases are
limited.[26] [173] See Emerging treatments .
• Medications to lower triglycerides have not shown clear benefit in CCD outcomes. A single trial
showed benefit from icosapent ethyl, although there are questions about harm from the placebo
mineral oil driving that result.[174] US guidelines suggest a possible role for icosapent ethyl after
modification of lifestyle factors and management of LDL. However, they recommend against
use of other omega-3-fatty-acid preparations, niacin, or fenofibrate for the purpose of reducing
cardiovascular risk.[26]
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
• The decision to add nonstatin therapies should be shared between patient and clinician following
a discussion on the risks and benefits, and taking into account patient preferences and costs.
Lifestyle modifications should be optimized, in addition to reviewing adherence to statins.
Beta-blocker therapy
• Beta-blockers decrease heart rate and myocardial contractility and, in turn, reduce myocardial
oxygen demand and anginal symptoms. In selected patients with CCD, beta-blockers may also
have a role in improving cardiac outcomes. The best evidence is in patients with CCD and reduced
ejection fraction (EF), for whom metoprolol, carvedilol, and bisoprolol particularly reduce cardiac
events including cardiac death.[175][176] [177] [178]
• Older trials showed improved outcomes in patients with recent MI. However, the benefits are less
clear for contemporary studies in which acute reperfusion and statin use are more common.[179]
 Studies of long-term use of beta-blockers after infarction are observational and do not show
consistent benefit in patients with normal EF.[180] [181] [182] [183]
• The US and European guidelines recommend beta-blocker therapy for patients with systolic
dysfunction.[23] [26] The US guidelines do not recommend long-term beta-blocker therapy to
improve outcomes in patients with CCD in the absence of MI in the past year, left ventricular EF
≤50%, or another primary indication for beta-blocker therapy (e.g., angina, arrhythmia, uncontrolled
hypertension).[26]
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone antagonist therapy
• ACE inhibitors result in a reduction in angiotensin II with an increase in bradykinin. These
changes in the physiological balance between angiotensin II and bradykinin could contribute to
the reductions in LV and vascular hypertrophy, atherosclerosis progression, plaque rupture, and
thrombosis through favorable changes in cardiac hemodynamics and improved myocardial oxygen
supply and demand. Clinical studies have demonstrated significant reductions in the incidence
of acute MI, unstable angina, and need for coronary revascularization in patients after MI with LV
dysfunction, independent of etiology.[184] [185] [186] Similar benefits have been seen in patients
without LV dysfunction who have atherosclerosis, vascular disease, diabetes, and additional risk
factors for coronary disease.[187] [188] [189]
• The US and European guidelines recommend ACE inhibitors (or angiotensin-II receptor
antagonists) primarily for patients with CCD who also have hypertension, systolic dysfunction,
diabetes mellitus, or chronic kidney disease. Use can also be considered for those with CCD who
have other vascular disease or are at very high risk of cardiovascular events.[23] [26]
Blood pressure control
• Lifestyle modification is recommended for patients with CCD and elevated blood pressure (120 to
129/<80mmHg). For patients with CCD and hypertension (≥130 mmHg systolic and/or ≥80 mmHg
diastolic), guidelines recommend pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatment to achieve a
target below 130/80 mmHg.[26] The European guidelines suggest a relaxed systolic target of 130
to 140 for patients over 65 years old.[23]
• Lifestyle modifications may include increased physical activity, Dietary Approaches to Stop
Hypertension (DASH) or mediterranean diet pattern, reduced dietary sodium and alcohol, and
weight reduction.[190] [191]
• In choosing antihypertensive medications, guidelines give priority to beta-blockers and ACE
inhibitors/angiotensin-II receptor antagonists in select patients with CCD and hypertension.[23] [26]
 For patients with MI in the past year, beta-blockers may reduce coronary events more than other
antihypertensives.[192] In placebo-controlled trials, ACE inhibitors improve outcomes for patients
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
with CCD generally and after MI but it is less clear that these agents offer better outcomes than
other antihypertensives.[185] [187] [188] For patients with stable angina, both beta-blockers and
calcium-channel blockers can have symptomatic benefit.
Management of diabetes
• For patients with type 2 diabetes, two classes of medication have shown significant cardiovascular
benefits beyond their effects on glycemia. These include sodium-glucose transporter-2 (SGLT2)
inhibitors (e.g., empagliflozin, dapagliflozin, canagliflozin), and glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)
receptor agonists (e.g., liraglutide, dulaglutide).[40] [193] [194] [195] [196] [197] For patients with
CCD and type 2 diabetes, use of either one of these medications is recommended independent of
A1c.[26] [198] Use of both an SGLT2 inhibitor and a GLP-1 receptor agonist may be considered
when needed for additional glycemic control but the additional cardiovascular benefits of the
combination have not been defined. There is no established role for use of SGLT2 inhibitors
or GLP-1 receptor agonists to improve cardiac outcomes in patients without diabetes or heart
failure.[26] One study has shown improved cardiac outcomes with use of a GLP-1 receptor agonist
in patients with obesity.[199]
• Of older, less costly medications, there is weak evidence of cardiovascular benefit with metformin
compared with sulfonylureas.[200]
• Patients with CCD and diabetes mellitus are at high-risk of morbidity and mortality from
cardiovascular events. In type 1 diabetes, glycemic control reduces the risk of macrovascular
complications including angina, MI, and need for revascularization.[201]
• In type 2 diabetes, the effects of glycemic control on macrovascular complications are less
clear.[40] Observational studies show an association between hyperglycemia and increased risk of
ischemic heart disease.[202] Randomized trials of more intensive glycemic control over 3 to 6 years
have not shown consistent reductions in MI nor cardiac death. Meta-analyses suggest a reduction
in the former but not the latter.[203] [204] [205] [206] [207] [208] Longer term follow-up may be
required.[209]
• ACE inhibitors (or angiotensin-II receptor antagonists) are recommended in the US and European
guidelines for patients with CCD and diabetes mellitus to reduce risk of cardiovascular events.[23]
[26]
Antianginal pharmacotherapy to reduce symptoms
• Sublingual nitroglycerin (delivered by either a tablet or spray formulation) is the therapy of choice
to terminate acute episodes of angina or for prophylaxis before activities known to induce anginal
symptoms. Onset of action is within minutes. Failure to resolve anginal symptoms with a reduction
in physical activity and a trial of sublingual nitroglycerin should prompt emergency evaluation for an
ACS (unstable angina or MI).[23] [26]
• For those with recurrent angina, beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers, and long-acting nitrates
have each been shown to reduce anginal events. As there are no head-to-head trials, selection
among these classes may be guided by adverse effects and/or baseline hemodynamics, and the
presence of systolic dysfunction.[23] [26][210] The three classes are often used in combination,
although beta-blockers should not be combined with nondihydropyridine calcium-channel blockers
(diltiazem, verapamil).
• A key component of therapy with long-acting nitrates is ensuring an adequate nitrate-free period
every day to avoid tolerance and loss of effect. Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors for erectile
dysfunction should be avoided in patients using nitrates as the combination may precipitate an
unsafe drop in blood pressure.[23] [26]
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
• Patients with vasospastic (Prinzmetal variant) angina may note greater reduction of symptoms with
use of calcium-channel blockers or nitrates due to their effect on coronary vasospasm.[211]
• Second-line antianginal therapies, such as ranolazine, may be added for angina that persists
despite use of combinations of primary therapies.[23] [26] US guidelines warn against the use of
ivabradine in patients with normal left ventricular function.[26]
Coronary revascularization
Revascularization, either by coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery or by PCI, may be indicated to
improve either the quality or quantity of life: to improve CCD symptoms refractory to medical therapy or to
improve survival.
The US, European, and UK guidelines all recommend revascularization for patients with limiting
symptoms despite maximal medical therapy.[26][210] [212] [213] The guidelines also recommend
revascularization in carefully selected cases to improve survival or other cardiac outcomes but disagree
about exactly which patients qualify and the roles for CABG and PCI. There is consensus in favor
of revascularization for patients with significant disease of the left main coronary artery but varying
recommendations regarding patients with other anatomy, reduced EF, and high ischemic burden.[26]
[210] [212] [213] Some European guidelines suggest the possibility of a less restrictive approach to
revascularization but do not offer specific recommendations.[23]
The US and European guidelines emphasize the role of fractional flow reserve (FFR) in revascularization
decisions.[23] [26][214] There is consensus that complex cases should be evaluated by a "heart team"
including interventional cardiology and cardiothoracic surgery.[26][210] [212] [213]
Revascularization for refractory symptoms:
• Revascularization is indicated in patients with unacceptable symptoms despite maximal medical
therapy. Symptoms may be classic angina or anginal equivalents such as dyspnea on exertion.
Randomized trials have shown CABG and PCI improve anginal symptoms over medical
therapy.[215] [216] [217]
• Of note, the only blinded trial comparing PCI to a placebo procedure did not show benefit of PCI
in relieving angina or enhancing exercise capacity.[218] The trial involved very aggressive medical
management in both groups and was limited by small sample size and brief follow-up; however, it
raises questions about the extent to which the apparent symptomatic benefits of PCI are due to the
placebo effect.
Revascularization for survival benefit:
• While the benefits of revascularization in the setting of ACS are clear, for patients with CCD
large trials have not shown reductions in cardiovascular mortality or MI when revascularization
is added to medical therapy. The classic COURAGE trial and the contemporary ISCHEMIA trial
showed no benefit from revascularization on mortality or MI.[219] [220] [221] Notably, patients with
obstruction of the left main coronary artery were excluded from both large trials. Meta-analyses
come to different conclusions and questions remain about the definition and clinical significance of
periprocedural infarcts in the ISCHEMIA trial.[217] [222]
• Trials focused solely on the mortality benefits of CABG in CCD are more dated but showed benefit
in certain subgroups of patients with coronary disease.[215] [223] [224] [225] The evolution of both
surgical techniques (e.g., arterial grafts, off-pump CABG) and the comparison medical therapies
(e.g., statins, beta-blockers) potentially limits the relevance of these older trials to contemporary
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
practice. PCI has not been shown to improve mortality but smaller studies and meta-analyses have
suggested possible benefit from FFR-guided PCI in other cardiac outcomes.[24] [226] [227] [228]
Considerations for management of additional specific
comorbidities
Chronic kidney disease (CKD):
• ACE inhibitors (or angiotensin-II receptor antagonists) are recommended in the US and European
guidelines for patients with CCD and CKD to reduce risk of cardiovascular events.[23] [26]
• Some drugs should be used with caution in patients with renal impairment and a dose adjustment
may be required. Some drugs may also be contraindicated in patients with renal impairment. Check
your local drug information source. In evaluating patients for revascularization by PCI, renal risks
should be considered and minimized.
• Consult with a nephrology specialist should be considered. See Chronic kidney disease .
Heart failure (HF):
• Patients with CCD and HF with reduced EF or HF with preserved EF should receive treatment as
per current HF guidelines.[229] [230]
• In selected patients with CAD and HF with left ventricular EF ≤35% and suitable coronary anatomy,
surgical revascularization in addition to GDMT for HF may improve symptoms, cardiovascular
hospitalizations, and long-term all-cause mortality.[26] [229] [230]
• See Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction , and Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction .
Atrial fibrillation:
• In patients with CCD and AF, long-term anticoagulant therapy is recommended for reduction of
ischemic stroke and other ischemic events.[23] Oral anticoagulant monotherapy (preferably with
a DOAC) without antiplatelet is recommended for many patients with stable CCD.[23] [26] For
select patients at higher risk (either chronically or temporarily following an event or procedure)
combination of a DOAC and single antiplatelet agent may be appropriate.
• Use of triple therapy (a DOAC plus DAPT) confers a very high bleeding risk but may be indicated
for up to 1 month after PCI, followed by a single antiplatelet agent plus a DOAC for 6-12
months.[26]
• See Established atrial fibrillation .
Peripheral artery disease (PAD):
• The same risk factors that predispose to coronary disease increase the risk of noncoronary
atherosclerotic diseases such as PAD and stroke. Measures taken to treat CCD may also reduce
these adverse outcomes.
• PAD is an important comorbidity; it is a similar disease process to coronary artery disease in a
different vascular bed. Management of PAD involves exercise programs and pharmacotherapy for
claudication. Management of CCD is not generally altered in the presence of PAD.
• See Peripheral arterial disease .
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Ongoing ( summary )
all patients
1st education and lifestyle modification
plus antiplatelet ± anticoagulant therapy
plus high-intensity statin
adjunct revascularization
with anginal symptoms plus sublingual nitroglycerin
plus beta-blocker ± calcium-channel blocker ±
long-acting nitrate
adjunct other antianginal therapies
with hypertension adjunct antihypertensive therapy
with persistently elevated
LDL-C and/or fasting
triglyceride level despite
maximally-tolerated
statin
adjunct additional lipid-lowering therapy
with type 2 diabetes plus sodium-glucose transporter-2 (SGLT2)
inhibitor and/or glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1) receptor agonist
plus ACE inhibitor or angiotensin-II receptor
antagonist
with chronic kidney
disease (CKD)
plus ACE inhibitor or angiotensin-II receptor
antagonist
with obesity adjunct weight loss program (pharmacologic
therapy or bariatric surgery)
with heart failure (HF) plus guideline-directed management and
therapy
with atrial fibrillation (AF) plus anticoagulant therapy
with depression adjunct psychologic and pharmacologic
interventions
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Ongoing
all patients
1st education and lifestyle modification
» All patients should be provided with
individualized patient education and guideline-
directed medical therapy with the goals of
reducing the risk of future cardiovascular events
and reducing anginal symptoms.
» Patient education includes ongoing
assessments and recommendations to help
patients achieve weight management, increased
physical activity, dietary modifications, lipid
goals, and smoking cessation.[23] [26] [Evidence
C] Cardiac rehabilitation, a multidisciplinary
approach that combines assessment,
education, assistance with lifestyle modification,
psychosocial support, and supervised exercise
is recommended after myocardial infarction (MI)
and revascularization as well as for patients with
stable angina.[23] [26][137]
» Additionally, helping patients understand their
medication regimens is a key component of
patient education and medication adherence.[26]
plus antiplatelet ± anticoagulant therapy
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» aspirin: 75-100 mg orally once daily
Secondary options
» clopidogrel: 75 mg orally once daily
OR
» aspirin: 75-100 mg orally once daily
-and-
» clopidogrel: 75 mg orally once daily
OR
» aspirin: 75-100 mg orally once daily
-and-
» rivaroxaban: 2.5 mg orally twice daily
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Ongoing
» All patients should be started on aspirin and
this should be continued indefinitely. For patients
with a contraindication to aspirin therapy, it is
reasonable to use clopidogrel.[23] [26][162] [231]
[232]
» After an episode of acute coronary syndrome
or placement of cardiac stents, combination
therapy with aspirin plus a P2Y12 inhibitor is
indicated. Duration of dual therapy depends
on the bleeding risk and antithrombotic benefit;
minimum durations are particularly important to
prevent thrombosis within cardiac stents.
» For selected patients who are at high-risk
of ischemic events and low-risk of bleeding
who do not have a separate indication for
anticoagulation, the addition of low-dose
rivaroxaban to aspirin monotherapy can reduce
a combined cardiovascular outcome. The benefit
is primarily reduced stroke and peripheral arterial
disease rather than MI and comes at the cost of
increased bleeding.[26] [168]
plus high-intensity statin
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» atorvastatin: high intensity: 40-80 mg orally
once daily
OR
» rosuvastatin: high intensity: 20-40 mg orally
once daily
» High-intensity statins are the mainstay of lipid
pharmacotherapy and appropriate for all patients
with chronic coronary disease (unless clearly
contraindicated), regardless of baseline low-
density lipoprotein.[26] [63] [99]
adjunct revascularization
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) or
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is
recommended to relieve anginal symptoms
in patients with continued unacceptable
angina despite maximal medical therapy.
Revascularization is also recommended in
selected patients for whom it is thought to
improve survival or other cardiac outcomes.
This includes patients with significant stenosis
of the left main coronary and, depending on
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
the guideline, patients with other anatomy,
reduced ejection fraction (EF) or large ischemic
burden.[26][210] [212] [213]
» Some European guidelines suggest a less
restrictive approach to revascularization of
lesions that are functionally significant on
invasive or noninvasive testing, although
evidence for this approach is limited.[23]
It is recommended that a multidisciplinary
team of general cardiologists, interventional
cardiologists, and cardiac surgeons - a
"heart team" - assemble to discuss and make
recommendations on the optimal management
strategy. This may include guideline-directed
medical therapy, PCI, CABG, or a combination of
all three.
» Revascularization does not obviate the need
for aggressive risk-factor modification to reduce
risk of future MI.
with anginal symptoms plus sublingual nitroglycerin
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» nitroglycerin: 0.3 to 0.6 mg sublingually
every 5 minutes when required, maximum 3
doses
» Sublingual nitroglycerin is the preferred
therapy to terminate acute episodes of angina or
for prophylaxis before activities known to induce
anginal symptoms.
» The mechanism of action is to reduce left
ventricular wall stress and associated myocardial
oxygen demand through systemic vasodilation.
Coronary blood flow is also increased by
coronary vasodilation. Onset of action is within
minutes.[233]
» Failure to resolve anginal symptoms with
a reduction in physical activity and a trial
of sublingual nitroglycerin should prompt
emergency evaluation for an ACS (unstable
angina or MI).[23]
» Concurrent use of phosphodiesterase-5
inhibitors (e.g., sildenafil, tadalafil, or vardenafil)
is contraindicated as the combination may result
in a precipitous drop in blood pressure (BP).[26]
plus beta-blocker ± calcium-channel blocker ±
long-acting nitrate
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Ongoing
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» metoprolol tartrate: 50-200 mg orally
(immediate-release) twice daily
-or-
» metoprolol succinate: 100-400 mg orally
(extended-release) once daily
-or-
» nadolol: 40-80 mg orally once daily
-or-
» bisoprolol: 5-20 mg orally once daily
--AND/OR--
» nifedipine: 30-90 mg orally (extended-
release) once daily
-or-
» amlodipine: 5-10 mg orally once daily
--AND/OR--
» isosorbide mononitrate: 20 mg orally
(immediate-release) twice daily
-or-
» isosorbide dinitrate: 5-40 mg orally
(immediate-release) two to three times daily
-or-
» nitroglycerin transdermal: 0.2 to 0.8 mg/
hour for 12 hours once daily, with a patch-free
interval of 12 hours each day
» Primary therapies for patients with chronic
anginal symptoms may include beta-blockers
(e.g., metoprolol, nadolol, bisoprolol), calcium-
channel blockers (e.g., nifedipine, amlodipine),
and long-acting nitrates.
» Guidelines generally recommend either a beta-
blocker or a calcium-channel blocker first-line;
choice of agent may be affected by the patient's
baseline pulse, BP, and comorbidities including
systolic dysfunction.[23] [26][210]
adjunct other antianginal therapies
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» ranolazine: 500-1000 mg orally twice daily
» Other antianginal therapies, such as
ranolazine, may be considered for angina that
persists despite use of primary therapies.
with hypertension adjunct antihypertensive therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
Primary options
» metoprolol tartrate: 50-100 mg orally
(immediate-release) twice daily
-or-
» metoprolol succinate: 50-200 mg orally
(extended-release) once daily
-or-
» nadolol: 40-120 mg orally once daily
-or-
» bisoprolol: 2.5 to 10 mg orally once daily
-or-
» carvedilol: 6.25 to 25 mg orally (immediate-
release) twice daily; 20-80 mg orally
(extended-release) once daily
--AND/OR--
» benazepril: 10-40 mg/day orally given in 1-2
divided doses
-or-
» captopril: 12.5 to 150 mg/day orally given in
2-3 divided doses
-or-
» enalapril: 5-40 mg/day orally given in 1-2
divided doses
-or-
» fosinopril: 10-40 mg orally once daily
-or-
» lisinopril: 10-40 mg orally once daily
-or-
» perindopril erbumine: 4-16 mg/day orally
given in 1-2 divided doses
-or-
» quinapril: 10-80 mg/day orally given in 1-2
divided doses
-or-
» ramipril: 2.5 to 20 mg/day orally given in 1-2
divided doses
-or-
» trandolapril: 1-4 mg orally once daily
-or-
» losartan: 50-100 mg/day orally given in 1-2
divided doses
-or-
» telmisartan: 20-80 mg orally once daily
-or-
» olmesartan medoxomil: 20-40 mg orally
once daily
-or-
» azilsartan medoxomil: 40-80 mg orally once
daily
» The US guidelines now recommend that
patients with CCD and hypertension be treated
to a target below 130/80 mmHg.[190] European
guidelines recommend 120-130 mmHg systolic
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Ongoing
for most patients with CCD and 130-140 mmHg
for those over 65 years old.[23]
» Beta-blockers and ACE inhibitors or
angiotensin-II receptor antagonists are indicated
regardless of BP for some CCD patients (i.e.,
those with LVD, MI in the past 3 years, or
stable angina) and these agents may also be
considered as treatments for hypertension
in other patients with CCD, although beta-
blockers are generally less potent and therefore
less preferred in the absence of another
indication.[26]
» Calcium-channel blockers also have
antianginal properties and may be used in
conjunction with beta-blockers. Additional
medications, including diuretics, may be required
to achieve BP targets.
» Atenolol and beta-blockers with intrinsic
sympathomimetic activity are inferior to other
beta-blockers, especially in older patients.
Consider alternatives to atenolol, labetalol,
acebutolol, or pindolol. Lifestyle modification,
including physical activity, the Dietary Approach
to Stop Hypertension (DASH) or mediterranean
diet pattern, reduced dietary sodium and alcohol,
and weight reduction, is recommended for
patients with CCD and elevated BP (120 to 129/
<80mmHg).[190] [191]
with persistently elevated
LDL-C and/or fasting
triglyceride level despite
maximally-tolerated
statin
adjunct additional lipid-lowering therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» ezetimibe: 10 mg orally once daily
Secondary options
» alirocumab: 75-150 mg subcutaneously
every 2 weeks; or 300 mg subcutaneously
every 4 weeks
OR
» evolocumab: 140 mg subcutaneously every
2 weeks; or 420 mg subcutaneously once
monthly
OR
» icosapent ethyl: 2 g orally twice daily
» The evidence supporting statin therapy in
CCD far exceeds that of other lipid-lowering
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
medications. However, for patients unable to
take statins, or who have a less than expected
reduction in low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
despite adherence at the highest tolerated
dose, ezetimibe monotherapy or combination
therapy with ezetimibe and a statin may be
considered.[26] [44]
» For patients at very high risk with persisting
elevations in LDL, a proprotein convertase
subtilisin-kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibitor (e.g.,
alirocumab, evolocumab) may be added
(although cost may remain a barrier).
» Newer nonstatin therapies are approved (e.g.,
bempedoic acid, inclisiran); however, evidence-
based guidelines do not recommend their
use as yet, and you should consult your local
protocols.[173] See Emerging treatments .
» In patients with a persistent high fasting
triglyceride level (150 to 499 mg/dL [1.7 to 5.6
mmol/L]) after modification of lifestyle factors
and management of LDL, the US guidelines
suggest a possible role for icosapent ethyl.[26]
» The decision to add nonstatin therapies should
be shared between patient and clinician following
a discussion on the risks and benefits, and
taking into account patient preferences. Lifestyle
modifications should be optimized, in addition to
reviewing adherence to statins.
with type 2 diabetes plus sodium-glucose transporter-2 (SGLT2)
inhibitor and/or glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1) receptor agonist
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» empagliflozin: 10-25 mg orally once daily
-or-
» dapagliflozin: 10 mg orally once daily
-or-
» canagliflozin: 100-300 mg orally once daily
--AND/OR--
» liraglutide: 0.6 to 1.8 mg subcutaneously
once daily
-or-
» dulaglutide: 0.75 to 4.5 mg subcutaneously
once weekly
» For patients with CCD and type 2 diabetes,
use of either a SGLT2 inhibitor (e.g.,
empagliflozin, dapagliflozin, canagliflozin) or
a GLP-1 receptor agonist (e.g., liraglutide,
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Ongoing
dulaglutide) is recommended independent of
A1c.[26] [198]
»  Both SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor
agonists have shown significant cardiovascular
benefits beyond their effects on glycemia.[40]
[193] [194] [195] [196] [197]
» Use of both an SGLT2 inhibitor and a GLP-1
receptor agonist may be considered when
needed for additional glycemic control but
the additional cardiovascular benefits of the
combination have not been defined.
plus ACE inhibitor or angiotensin-II receptor
antagonist
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» benazepril: 10-40 mg/day orally given in 1-2
divided doses
OR
» captopril: 12.5 to 150 mg/day orally given in
2-3 divided doses
OR
» enalapril: 5-40 mg/day orally given in 1-2
divided doses
OR
» fosinopril: 10-40 mg orally once daily
OR
» lisinopril: 10-40 mg orally once daily
OR
» perindopril erbumine: 4-16 mg/day orally
given in 1-2 divided doses
OR
» quinapril: 10-80 mg/day orally given in 1-2
divided doses
OR
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
» ramipril: 2.5 to 20 mg/day orally given in 1-2
divided doses
OR
» trandolapril: 1-4 mg orally once daily
OR
» losartan: 50-100 mg/day orally given in 1-2
divided doses
OR
» telmisartan: 20-80 mg orally once daily
OR
» olmesartan medoxomil: 20-40 mg orally
once daily
OR
» azilsartan medoxomil: 40-80 mg orally once
daily
» ACE inhibitors (or angiotensin-II receptor
antagonists) are recommended in the US and
European guidelines for patients with CCD and
diabetes mellitus to reduce risk of cardiovascular
events.[23] [26]
with chronic kidney
disease (CKD)
plus ACE inhibitor or angiotensin-II receptor
antagonist
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» ACE inhibitors (or angiotensin-II receptor
antagonists) are recommended in the US and
European guidelines for patients with CCD and
CKD to reduce risk of cardiovascular events.[23]
[26] Choice of drug and the appropriate dose
depends on the severity of renal impairment, and
you should consult your local drug information
source or a specialist for further guidance.
with obesity adjunct weight loss program (pharmacologic
therapy or bariatric surgery)
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» For those with overweight or obesity,
counseling on weight loss, with goals including
reducing body weight with diet and physical
activity, is advised.[23] [26] Guidelines further
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Ongoing
advise consideration of pharmacologic therapy
and bariatric surgery in selected patients.[26]
» Although weight loss interventions improve
cardiovascular risk factors (including weight,
BP, lipids, insulin resistance) there is limited
evidence of improved cardiovascular outcomes
in weight loss trials.[48] Given the imperfections
of body mass index as a risk marker, the limited
efficacy of even multicomponent lifestyle
interventions in promoting sustained weight loss,
and concern for weight stigma as a barrier to
care, providers might also focus on physical
activity and cardiorespiratory fitness rather than
weight per se as a treatment goal.
» See Obesity in adults .
with heart failure (HF) plus guideline-directed management and
therapy
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Patients with CCD and HF with reduced EF or
HF with preserved EF should receive treatment
as per current HF guidelines.[229] [230]
» In selected patients with coronary artery
disease and HF with left ventricular EF ≤35%
and suitable coronary anatomy, surgical
revascularization in addition to GDMT for
HF may improve symptoms, cardiovascular
hospitalizations, and long-term all-cause
mortality.[26] [229] [230]
» See Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
, and Heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction .
with atrial fibrillation (AF) plus anticoagulant therapy
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» In patients with CCD and AF, long-term
anticoagulant therapy is recommended for
reduction of ischemic stroke and other ischemic
events.[23] Oral anticoagulant monotherapy
(preferably with a direct oral anticoagulant
[DOAC]) without antiplatelet is recommended
for many patients with stable CCD.[23] [26] For
select patients at higher risk (either chronically
or temporarily following an event or procedure)
combination of a DOAC and single antiplatelet
agent may be appropriate.
» Use of triple therapy (a DOAC plus dual
antiplatelet therapy [DAPT]) confers a very high
bleeding risk but may be indicated for up to 1
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
month after PCI, followed by a single antiplatelet
agent plus a DOAC for 6-12 months.[26]
» See Established atrial fibrillation .
with depression adjunct psychologic and pharmacologic
interventions
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Depression is common in patients with CCD,
particularly after acute infarction. It is associated
with worse health behaviors and possibly worse
cardiovascular outcomes.[149] Evidence on the
cardiac effects of depression treatment is limited,
but it is reasonable to screen patients and treat
as indicated.[23] [26] [150]
» See Depression in adults .
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Emerging
Colchicine
Guidelines provide a weak recommendation that the anti-inflammatory agent colchicine may be considered
for select patients with CCD who are at high-risk of subsequent events despite maximum tolerated guideline-
directed management and therapy.[26] Trials of long-term therapy (1 to 3 years) have shown reduction in a
combined cardiovascular outcome with a trend toward reduced cardiovascular death counterbalanced by a
trend toward increased noncardiovascular death.[234] [235] Limitations include GI adverse effects (which
prompted 10% withdrawal during the run in phase of the largest study) as well as a narrow therapeutic index,
drug interactions, and the need for dose adjustments in renal impairment.[26] [234] Further studies are
required to guide clinical practice.
Other antianginal therapies
Nicorandil and trimetazidine are antianginal agents that are not available in the US, but are used in other
countries. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in the UK has issued
warnings concerning advice on the use of nicorandil.[236] There is limited evidence supporting the use of
trimetazidine.[237] [238]
Other LDL-lowering therapies
Bempedoic acid and inclisiran are newer nonstatin therapies approved for use with diet and maximally
tolerated statin therapy in adults who require additional lowering of LDL-C.[239] They may be selectively
considered for high risk patients with severely or persistently elevated LDL despite use of (or for those unable
to use) better established alternatives. Trials assessing clinical outcomes are ongoing, with one trial showing
benefit in statin-intolerant patients.[240] [241] [242]
Coronary-sinus-reducing device
A coronary-sinus-reducing device has shown some promise in the small COSIRA trial, improving symptoms
and quality of life in patients with refractory angina who were not candidates for revascularization.[243]
Primary prevention
The American Heart Association defines eight key measures for improving and maintaining cardiovascular
health, "Life’s Essential 8", these are: healthy diet, participation in physical activity, avoidance of nicotine,
healthy sleep, healthy weight, and healthy levels of blood lipids, blood glucose, and blood pressure.[58]
Prevention of coronary disease includes community- and patient-level interventions to encourage exercise,
healthy diet, and ideal body weight while discouraging smoking. The US Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) recommends that adults at increased risk of cardiovascular disease are offered behavioral
counseling interventions to promote a healthy diet and physical activity; those not at high risk may also
be selectively considered for behavioral counseling interventions, while recognizing that the net benefit is
smaller.[59] [60]
Exercise: guidelines recommend that all adults should undertake 150 to 300 minutes of moderate-intensity
aerobic physical activity, or at least 75 to 150 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity
throughout the week.[18] [33] [61]
Diet: a Mediterranean-type diet, with a higher intake of vegetables, fruits, legumes, nuts, whole grains, lean
protein (e.g., fish), and fiber is recommended to lower the risk of cardiovascular disease.[18] [33] Intake of
trans fats, red meat, processed meat, refined carbohydrates, and sweetened drinks should be minimized or
avoided. Salt intake should be reduced.
Weight: individuals with overweight and obesity should be counseled on physical activity and diet to
promote weight loss, reduce blood pressure and dyslipidemia, and improve atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease (ASCVD) risk profile.[18] [33] Although weight loss interventions improve cardiovascular risk
factors (including weight, blood pressure, lipids, insulin resistance), there is limited evidence of improved
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
cardiovascular outcomes in weight loss trials.[48] Given the imperfections of BMI as a risk marker, the limited
efficacy of even multicomponent lifestyle interventions in promoting sustained weight loss, and concern
for weight stigma as a barrier to care, providers might also focus on physical activity and cardiorespiratory
fitness rather than weight per se as a treatment goal.
Smoking cessation: all adults who smoke/use tobacco are strongly advised to quit. Smoking cessation
benefits all people who smoke regardless of age, comorbidities, or current health problems. See Smoking
cessation .
Treatment targets for antihypertensive therapy and use of statin medications are typically guided by individual
risk for cardiovascular disease, usually estimated with a 10-year risk calculator, such as the Pooled Cohort
Equations or newer PREVENT™ calculator (US), QRISK or SCORE (Europe).  [SCORE2 and SCORE2-
OP risk assessment models] (https://www.escardio.org/Education/Practice-Tools/CVD-prevention-toolbox/
SCORE-Risk-Charts)
Among adults at borderline (5% to <7.5%) and intermediate (≥7.5% to <20%) risk, the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) states that it is reasonable to use the following additional
individual risk-enhancing clinical factors to guide decisions about preventive therapy:[18]
• Family history of premature ASCVD (men ages <55 years; women ages <65 years)
• Primary hypercholesterolemia (low-density lipoprotein cholesterol [LDL-C], 160–189 mg/dL [4.1–4.8
mmol/L]; non-high density lipoprotein cholesterol [non-HDL-C], 190–219 mg/dL [4.9–5.6 mmol/L])
• Optimally, three determinations
• Metabolic syndrome (increased waist circumference [by ethnically appropriate cutpoints], elevated
triglycerides [>150 mg/dL, nonfasting], elevated blood pressure, elevated glucose, and low HDL-C [<40
mg/dL in men; <50 mg/dL in women] are factors; a tally of three makes the diagnosis)
• Chronic kidney disease (estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] 15–59 mL/min/1.73 m² with or
without albuminuria; not treated with dialysis or kidney transplantation)
• Chronic inflammatory conditions, such as psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, or HIV/AIDS
• History of premature menopause (before ages 40 years) and history of pregnancy-associated
conditions that increase later ASCVD risk, such as preeclampsia
• High-risk race/ethnicity (e.g., South Asian ancestry)
• Lipids/biomarkers: associated with increased ASCVD risk
• Persistently elevated (optimally, three determinations) primary hypertriglyceridemia (≥175 mg/
dL, nonfasting)
• If measured: elevated high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (≥2.0 mg/L)
• If measured: elevated lipoprotein (a) (Lp(a)). A relative indication for its measurement is family
history of premature ASCVD. An Lp(a) ≥50 mg/dL or ≥125 nmol/L constitutes a risk-enhancing
factor, especially at higher levels of Lp(a)
• If measured: elevated apolipoprotein B (apoB) (≥130 mg/dL). A relative indication for its
measurement is triglyceride ≥200 mg/dL. A level ≥130 mg/dL corresponds to an LDL-C >160
mg/dL and constitutes a risk-enhancing factor
• If measured: ankle-brachial index (ABI) (<0.9)
The USPSTF recommends that adults ages 40 to 75 years who have one or more cardiovascular risk factors
(i.e., dyslipidemia, diabetes, hypertension, or smoking) and an estimated 10-year cardiovascular disease
risk of 10% or greater should be started on a statin. Those with 10-year risk of 7.5% to less than 10% may
selectively be offered a statin.[62]
Aspirin is no longer routinely recommended for primary prevention but may be considered in selected
patients for whom the absolute cardiovascular benefit outweighs the absolute risk of increased bleeding.[18]
[33] [63] [64]
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
The table that follows summarizes recommendations for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease
(CVD) from the ACC/AHA.[18] Estimate CVD risk using a 10-year risk calculator, such as the Pooled
Cohort Equations (ASCVD Risk Estimator). Newer calculators such as PREVENT™ may yield fewer
treatment recommendations if applied at thresholds as outlined in the table below; adjustments to risk
thresholds may be required if using PREVENT™ in conjunction with the ACC/AHA primary prevention
guidance, although evidence to support this approach is limited.
Note that an individual patient may fall into more than one group and so interventions might be additive;
please review all population and subpopulation groups to assess all that apply.
Adult at borderline risk for ASCVD; without type 2 diabetes
5% to <7.5% 10-year ASCVD risk
With tobacco use or exposure
Intervention Goal
Smoking cessation counseling ±
pharmacotherapy
Advise all adults who use tobacco to quit; a
combination of behavioral interventions plus
pharmacotherapy is recommended to maximize quit
rates.
Advise all patients to avoid secondhand smoke
exposure to reduce ASCVD risk.
See Smoking cessation .
Tobacco abstinence and avoidance of
secondhand smoke exposure; reduced overall
risk of ASCVD
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
With overweight (BMI=25.0-29.9 kg/m²) or obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m²)
Intervention Goal
Counseling and comprehensive lifestyle
interventions
Where feasible, refer patients for comprehensive
lifestyle interventions as part of a structured
program incorporating regular self-monitoring of
food intake, physical activity, and weight.
The ACC/AHA states that high intensity (≥14
sessions in 6 months) comprehensive weight-loss
interventions provided by a trained interventionist
work best. However, it is noted that other modalities,
such as electronically delivered weight-loss
programs with personalized feedback and some
commercial-based programs, have also shown
moderate results.
Consider whether to offer select patients, or refer
them for, Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-
approved pharmacologic therapies and bariatric
surgery, adjunctive to complementary lifestyle
interventions.
It is recommended that BMI is interpreted with
caution in people of Asian ancestry, older adults,
and muscular adults.
See Obesity in adults .
Weight loss; reduced waist circumference;
increased physical activity; reduced caloric
intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Weight loss:
• The ACC/AHA defines clinically meaningful
weight loss as ≥5% initial weight.
Waist circumference:
• Definitions of elevated waist circumference
are ≥40 inches (≥102 cm) in men and ≥35
inches (≥88 cm) in women.
Physical activity:
• Increased physical activity, preferably aerobic
physical activity (e.g., brisk walking) for ≥150
minutes/week (equal to ≥30 minutes/day on
most days of the week), is recommended for
initial weight loss.
• Higher levels of physical activity,
approximately 200-300 minutes/week, are
recommended to maintain weight loss or
minimize weight regain after 1 year.
Reduced caloric intake:
• Caloric intake reduced by ≥500 kcal/day from
baseline, which often can be attained by
limiting women to 1200-1500 kcal/day and
men to 1500-1800 kcal/day.
• A very-low-calorie diet (defined as <800
kcal/day) is recommended only in limited
circumstances and only by trained clinicians
in a medical care setting with the patient
under medical supervision.
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
With moderate or severe hypercholesterolemia
Intervention Goal
Individualized management
A maximally-tolerated statin is recommended for
all patients ages 20-75 years with severe primary
hypercholesterolemia, regardless of estimated 10-
year ASCVD risk.
For patients ages >75 years, statins are not
routinely recommended, but may be considered on
a case-by-case basis depending on the individual
risk status and potential for adverse effects.
Although statins are not routinely recommended
in young adults ages 20-39 years, they
may be considered in those with moderate
hypercholesterolemia (LDL-C ≥160 mg/dL [≥4.1
mmol/L] where there is a positive family history of
premature ASCVD.
See Hypercholesterolemia .
Individualized LDL-C target; reduced overall
risk of ASCVD
See Hypercholesterolemia .
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
With risk-enhancing factors or high coronary artery calcium score, but no
hypercholesterolemia; ages 40-75 years
Intervention Goal
Consider a moderate-intensity statin
If risk-enhancing factors are present, have a risk
discussion with the patient regarding initiation of a
moderate-intensity statin.
Coronary artery calcium scoring is not routinely
used to guide treatment decisions in the borderline
risk group. However, in select borderline risk adults
it may be used to guide decision making regarding
the need for a statin as follows.
• Coronary artery calcium score 0 Agatston
units (AU): reasonable to withhold a statin
and reassess in 5-10 years, providing higher
risk conditions (e.g., diabetes, family history
of premature CHD, cigarette smoking) are
absent
• Coronary artery calcium scores 1-99 AU:
reasonable to initiate statin treatment for
patients ≥55 years
• Coronary calcium score ≥100 AU or ≥75th
age/sex/race percentile: reasonable to initiate
a statin
For patients ages >75 years, statins are not
routinely recommended; assessment of risk status
and a clinician–patient risk discussion is needed
to decide whether to continue or initiate statin
treatment, taking into account statin safety and the
potential for statin-associated adverse effects.
Reduction in LDL-C by 30% to 49%; reduced
overall risk of ASCVD
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
With elevated blood pressure (120-129/<80 mmHg)
Intervention Goal
Nonpharmacologic treatment to lower blood
pressure
Recommend the following to patients:
• Weight loss
• A heart-healthy dietary pattern
• Sodium restriction
• Dietary potassium supplementation
• Increased physical activity with a structured
exercise program
• Limited alcohol intake
Blood pressure reduction; improved dietary
habits; increased physical activity; reduced
alcohol intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Assess adherence to, and the impact of,
nonpharmacologic treatment within 3-6 months.
Weight loss:
• The best goal is ideal body weight, but aim
for at least a 1 kg reduction in body weight for
most adults who are overweight.
Heart-healthy dietary pattern:
• Aim for consumption of a diet rich in fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy
products, with reduced content of saturated
and total fat.
Sodium restriction:
• Optimal goal is <1500 mg/day, but aim for at
least a 1000 mg/day reduction in most adults.
Dietary potassium supplementation:
• Aim for 3500-5000 mg/day, preferably by
consumption of a diet rich in potassium.
Increased physical activity:
• Aerobic exercise: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week, 65% to 75% heart rate reserve.
• Dynamic resistance: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week.
• Isometric resistance: aim for 4 × 2 minutes
(hand grip), 1 minute rest between exercises,
30% to 40% maximum voluntary contraction,
three sessions/week for 8-10 weeks.
Limited alcohol intake:
• For people who consume alcohol, reduce
consumption to ≤2 drinks daily (men) or ≤1
drink daily (women).
Blood pressure reduction:
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Intervention Goal
• Follow recommendations on blood pressure
targets in line with published clinical guidance
on management of hypertension.
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
With stage 1 hypertension (blood pressure 130-139/80-89 mmHg)
Intervention Goal
Nonpharmacologic treatment to lower blood
pressure
Recommend the following to patients:
• Weight loss
• A heart-healthy dietary pattern
• Sodium restriction
• Dietary potassium supplementation
• Increased physical activity with a structured
exercise program
• Limited alcohol intake
Blood pressure reduction; improved dietary
habits; increased physical activity; reduced
alcohol intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Assess adherence to, and the impact of,
nonpharmacologic treatment within 3-6 months.
Weight loss:
• The best goal is ideal body weight, but aim
for at least a 1 kg reduction in body weight for
most adults who are overweight.
Heart-healthy dietary pattern:
• Aim for consumption of a diet rich in fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy
products, with reduced content of saturated
and total fat.
Sodium restriction:
• Optimal goal is <1500 mg/day, but aim for at
least a 1000 mg/day reduction in most adults.
Dietary potassium supplementation:
• Aim for 3500-5000 mg/day, preferably by
consumption of a diet rich in potassium.
Increased physical activity:
• Aerobic exercise: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week, 65% to 75% heart rate reserve.
• Dynamic resistance: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week.
• Isometric resistance: aim for 4 × 2 minutes
(hand grip), 1 minute rest between exercises,
30% to 40% maximum voluntary contraction,
three sessions/week for 8-10 weeks.
Limited alcohol intake:
• For people who consume alcohol, reduce
consumption to ≤2 drinks daily (men) or ≤1
drink daily (women).
Blood pressure reduction:
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Intervention Goal
• Follow recommendations on blood pressure
targets in line with published clinical guidance
on management of hypertension.
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
With stage 2 hypertension (blood pressure ≥140/90 mmHg)
Intervention Goal
Nonpharmacologic treatment and medication
to lower blood pressure
Nonpharmacologic treatment:
Recommend the following to patients:
• Weight loss
• A heart-healthy dietary pattern
• Sodium restriction
• Dietary potassium supplementation
• Increased physical activity with a structured
exercise program
• Limited alcohol intake
Blood pressure lowering medication:
Offer antihypertensive medication in line with
published clinical guidance on management of
hypertension.
See Essential hypertension .
Blood pressure reduction (goal typically
<130/80 mmHg); improved dietary habits;
increased physical activity; reduced alcohol
intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Assess adherence to, and the impact of,
nonpharmacologic treatment within 3-6 months.
Weight loss:
• The best goal is ideal body weight, but aim
for at least a 1 kg reduction in body weight for
most adults who are overweight.
Heart-healthy dietary pattern:
• Aim for consumption of a diet rich in fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy
products, with reduced content of saturated
and total fat.
Sodium restriction:
• Optimal goal is <1500 mg/day, but aim for at
least a 1000 mg/day reduction in most adults.
Dietary potassium supplementation:
• Aim for 3500-5000 mg/day, preferably by
consumption of a diet rich in potassium.
Increased physical activity:
• Aerobic exercise: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week, 65% to 75% heart rate reserve.
• Dynamic resistance: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week.
• Isometric resistance: aim for 4 × 2 minutes
(hand grip), 1 minute rest between exercises,
30% to 40% maximum voluntary contraction,
three sessions/week for 8-10 weeks.
Limited alcohol intake:
• For people who consume alcohol, reduce
consumption to ≤2 drinks daily (men) or ≤1
drink daily (women).
Blood pressure reduction:
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Intervention Goal
• A target blood pressure of <130/80 mmHg
may be reasonable.
Adult at intermediate risk for ASCVD; without type 2 diabetes
≥7.5% to <20% 10-year ASCVD risk
With tobacco use or exposure
Intervention Goal
Smoking cessation counseling ±
pharmacotherapy
Advise all adults who use tobacco to quit; a
combination of behavioral interventions plus
pharmacotherapy is recommended to maximize quit
rates.
Advise all patients to avoid secondhand smoke
exposure to reduce ASCVD risk.
See Smoking cessation .
Tobacco abstinence and avoidance of second
hand smoke exposure; reduced overall risk of
ASCVD
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
With overweight (BMI=25.0-29.9 kg/m²) or obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m²)
Intervention Goal
Counseling and comprehensive lifestyle
interventions
Where feasible, refer patients for comprehensive
lifestyle interventions as part of a structured
program incorporating regular self-monitoring of
food intake, physical activity, and weight.
The ACC/AHA states that high-intensity (≥14
sessions in 6 months) comprehensive weight-loss
interventions provided by a trained interventionist
work best. However, it is noted that other modalities,
such as electronically delivered weight-loss
programs with personalized feedback and some
commercial-based programs, have also shown
moderate results.
Consider whether to offer select patients, or refer
them for, FDA-approved pharmacologic therapies
and bariatric surgery, adjunctive to complementary
lifestyle interventions.
It is recommended that BMI is interpreted with
caution in people of Asian ancestry, older adults,
and muscular adults.
See Obesity in adults .
Weight loss; reduced waist circumference;
increased physical activity; reduced caloric
intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Weight loss:
• The ACC/AHA defines clinically meaningful
weight loss as ≥5% initial weight.
Waist circumference:
• Definitions of elevated waist circumference
are ≥40 inches (≥102 cm) in men and ≥35
inches (≥88 cm) in women.
Physical activity:
• Increased physical activity, preferably aerobic
physical activity (e.g., brisk walking) for ≥150
minutes/week (equal to ≥30 minutes/day on
most days of the week), is recommended for
initial weight loss.
• Higher levels of physical activity,
approximately 200-300 minutes/week, are
recommended to maintain weight loss or
minimize weight regain after 1 year.
Reduced caloric intake:
• Caloric intake reduced by ≥500 kcal/day from
baseline, which often can be attained by
limiting women to 1200-1500 kcal/day and
men to 1500-1800 kcal/day.
• A very-low-calorie diet (defined as <800
kcal/day) is recommended only in limited
circumstances and only by trained clinicians
in a medical care setting with the patient
under medical supervision.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
With moderate or severe hypercholesterolemia
Intervention Goal
Individualized management
A maximally-tolerated statin is recommended for
all patients ages 20-75 years with severe primary
hypercholesterolemia, regardless of estimated 10-
year ASCVD risk.
For patients ages >75 years, statins are not
routinely recommended, but may be considered on
a case-by-case basis depending on the individual
risk status and potential for adverse effects.
Although statins are not routinely recommended
in young adults ages 20-39 years, they
may be considered in those with moderate
hypercholesterolemia (LDL-C ≥160 mg/dL [≥4.1
mmol/L] where there is a positive family history of
premature ASCVD.
See Hypercholesterolemia .
Individualized LDL-C target; reduced overall
risk of ASCVD
See Hypercholesterolemia .
62 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 63 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Without severe primary cholesterolemia (LDL-C <190 mg/dL [<4.9 mmol/L]); ages 40-75 years
Intervention Goal
Consider a moderate-intensity statin,
following risk discussion
Have a risk discussion with the patient to decide
whether to initiate a moderate-intensity statin.
Knowledge of risk-enhancing factors is useful for
all patients but particularly for those at intermediate
risk (ASCVD risk of 7.5% to ≤20%). The presence
of risk-enhancing factors may lower the threshold for
statin initiation or intensification.
In adults at intermediate risk, coronary artery
calcium scores may also be used to guide treatment
decisions as follows:
• Coronary artery calcium score 0 AU:
reasonable to withhold a statin and reassess
in 5-10 years, providing higher risk conditions
(e.g., diabetes, family history of premature
CHD, and cigarette smoking) are absent.
• Coronary artery calcium score 1-99 AU:
reasonable to initiate statin treatment for
patients ages ≥ 55 years.
• Coronary calcium score ≥100 AU or ≥75th
age/sex/race percentile: reasonable to initiate
a statin.
For patients ages >75 years, statins are not
routinely recommended; assessment of risk status
and a clinician–patient risk discussion is needed
to decide whether to continue or initiate statin
treatment, taking into account statin safety and the
potential for statin-associated adverse effects.
Reduction in LDL-C by 30% to 49%; reduced
overall risk of ASCVD
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
63
=== Page 64 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
With elevated blood pressure (120-129/<80 mmHg)
Intervention Goal
Nonpharmacologic treatment to lower blood
pressure
Recommend the following to patients:
• Weight loss
• A heart-healthy dietary pattern
• Sodium restriction
• Dietary potassium supplementation
• Increased physical activity with a structured
exercise program
• Limited alcohol intake
Blood pressure reduction; improved dietary
habits; increased physical activity; reduced
alcohol intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Assess adherence to, and the impact of,
nonpharmacologic treatment within 3-6 months.
Weight loss:
• The best goal is ideal body weight, but aim
for at least a 1 kg reduction in body weight for
most adults who are overweight.
Heart-healthy dietary pattern:
• Aim for consumption of a diet rich in fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy
products, with reduced content of saturated
and total fat.
Sodium restriction:
• Optimal goal is <1500 mg/day, but aim for at
least a 1000 mg/day reduction in most adults.
Dietary potassium supplementation:
• Aim for 3500-5000 mg/day, preferably by
consumption of a diet rich in potassium.
Increased physical activity:
• Aerobic exercise: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week, 65% to 75% heart rate reserve.
• Dynamic resistance: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week.
• Isometric resistance: aim for 4 × 2 minutes
(hand grip), 1 minute rest between exercises,
30% to 40% maximum voluntary contraction,
three sessions/week for 8-10 weeks.
Limited alcohol intake:
• For people who consume alcohol, reduce
consumption to ≤2 drinks daily (men) or ≤1
drink daily (women).
Blood pressure reduction:
64 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 65 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Intervention Goal
• Follow recommendations on blood pressure
targets in line with published clinical guidance
on management of hypertension.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
65
=== Page 66 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
With stage 1 hypertension (blood pressure 130-139/80-89 mmHg) and estimated 10-year ASCVD
event risk <10%
Intervention Goal
Nonpharmacologic treatment to lower blood
pressure
The ACC/AHA notes that nonpharmacologic
intervention is an appropriate first-line treatment
for adults with stage 1 hypertension who have an
estimated 10-year ASCVD risk <10%.
Recommend the following to patients:
• Weight loss
• A heart-healthy dietary pattern
• Sodium restriction
• Dietary potassium supplementation
• Increased physical activity with a structured
exercise program
• Limited alcohol intake
Blood pressure reduction; improved dietary
habits; increased physical activity; reduced
alcohol intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Assess adherence to, and the impact of,
nonpharmacologic treatment within 3-6 months.
Weight loss:
• The best goal is ideal body weight, but aim
for at least a 1 kg reduction in body weight for
most adults who are overweight.
Heart-healthy dietary pattern:
• Aim for consumption of a diet rich in fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy
products, with reduced content of saturated
and total fat.
Sodium restriction:
• Optimal goal is <1500 mg/day, but aim for at
least a 1000 mg/day reduction in most adults.
Dietary potassium supplementation:
• Aim for 3500-5000 mg/day, preferably by
consumption of a diet rich in potassium.
Increased physical activity:
• Aerobic exercise: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week, 65% to 75% heart rate reserve.
• Dynamic resistance: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week.
• Isometric resistance: aim for 4 × 2 minutes
(hand grip), 1 minute rest between exercises,
30% to 40% maximum voluntary contraction,
three sessions/week for 8-10 weeks.
Limited alcohol intake:
• For people who consume alcohol, reduce
consumption to ≤2 drinks daily (men) or ≤1
drink daily (women).
Blood pressure reduction:
66 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 67 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Intervention Goal
• Follow recommendations on blood pressure
targets in line with published clinical guidance
on management of hypertension.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
67
=== Page 68 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
With stage 1 hypertension (blood pressure 130-139/80-89 mmHg) and estimated 10-year ASCVD
event risk of 10% or higher
Intervention Goal
Nonpharmacologic treatment and medication
to lower blood pressure
Nonpharmacologic treatment:
Recommend the following to patients:
• Weight loss
• A heart-healthy dietary pattern
• Sodium restriction
• Dietary potassium supplementation
• Increased physical activity with a structured
exercise program
• Limited alcohol intake
Blood pressure lowering medication:
Offer antihypertensive medication in line with
published clinical guidance on management of
hypertension.
Blood pressure reduction (goal typically
<130/80 mmHg); improved dietary habits;
increased physical activity; reduced alcohol
intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Assess adherence to, and the impact of,
nonpharmacologic treatment within 3-6 months.
Weight loss:
• The best goal is ideal body weight, but aim
for at least a 1 kg reduction in body weight for
most adults who are overweight.
Heart-healthy dietary pattern:
• Aim for consumption of a diet rich in fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy
products, with reduced content of saturated
and total fat.
Sodium restriction:
• Optimal goal is <1500 mg/day, but aim for at
least a 1000 mg/day reduction in most adults.
Dietary potassium supplementation:
• Aim for 3500-5000 mg/day, preferably by
consumption of a diet rich in potassium.
Increased physical activity:
• Aerobic exercise: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week, 65% to 75% heart rate reserve.
• Dynamic resistance: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week.
• Isometric resistance: aim for 4 × 2 minutes
(hand grip), 1 minute rest between exercises,
30% to 40% maximum voluntary contraction,
three sessions/week for 8-10 weeks.
Limited alcohol intake:
• For people who consume alcohol, reduce
consumption to ≤2 drinks daily (men) or ≤1
drink daily (women).
Blood pressure goal:
68 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 69 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Intervention Goal
• For those requiring pharmacologic treatment
for hypertension, including those with chronic
kidney disease, a target blood pressure
<130/80 mmHg is usually recommended.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
69
=== Page 70 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
With stage 2 hypertension (blood pressure ≥140/90 mmHg)
Intervention Goal
Nonpharmacologic treatment and medication
to lower blood pressure
Nonpharmacologic treatment:
Recommend the following to patients:
• Weight loss
• A heart-healthy dietary pattern
• Sodium restriction
• Dietary potassium supplementation
• Increased physical activity with a structured
exercise program
• Limited alcohol intake
Blood pressure lowering medication:
Offer antihypertensive medication in line with
published clinical guidance on management of
hypertension.
Blood pressure reduction (goal typically
<130/80 mmHg); improved dietary habits;
increased physical activity; reduced alcohol
intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Assess adherence to, and the impact of, non
pharmacologic treatment within 3-6 months.
Weight loss:
• The best goal is ideal body weight, but aim
for at least a 1 kg reduction in body weight for
most adults who are overweight.
Heart-healthy dietary pattern:
• Aim for consumption of a diet rich in fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy
products, with reduced content of saturated
and total fat.
Sodium restriction:
• Optimal goal is <1500 mg/day, but aim for at
least a 1000 mg/day reduction in most adults.
Dietary potassium supplementation:
• Aim for 3500-5000 mg/day, preferably by
consumption of a diet rich in potassium.
Increased physical activity:
• Aerobic exercise: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week, 65% to 75% heart rate reserve.
• Dynamic resistance: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week.
• Isometric resistance: aim for 4 × 2 minutes
(hand grip), 1 minute rest between exercises,
30% to 40% maximum voluntary contraction,
three sessions/week for 8-10 weeks.
Limited alcohol intake:
• For people who consume alcohol, reduce
consumption to ≤2 drinks daily (men) or ≤1
drink daily (women).
Blood pressure goal:
• For those requiring pharmacologic treatment
for hypertension, including those with chronic
70 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 71 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Intervention Goal
kidney disease, a target blood pressure
<130/80 mmHg is usually recommended.
With comprehensive evaluation suggestive of a favorable risk:benefit ratio for prophylactic
aspirin; ages 40-70 years
Intervention Goal
Consider low-dose aspirin
To balance the benefits and risks, low-dose aspirin
is recommended only for select adults ages 40-70
years who are at higher ASCVD risk but not at
increased bleeding risk, following shared decision
making.
The ACC/AHH notes that prophylactic aspirin
generally becomes more favorable for patients with
>10% estimated 10-year ASCVD risk. This is an
individualized decision:
• Contemporary data show that absolute
risk for ASCVD events typically exceeds
that of bleeding and, although the gap of
relative benefit to relative harm for aspirin
has narrowed, the number needed to treat
to prevent an ASCVD event remains lower
than the number needed to harm to cause
bleeding.
• Some patients, in discussion with their
clinician, may feel that the benefit of
prophylactic aspirin is comparable to the
risk and may instead choose to focus on
optimal control of other modifiable ASCVD
risk factors.
Consider risk-enhancing factors +/- coronary artery
score, where available, as part of the risk:benefit
analysis.
Prophylactic aspirin is not typically recommended
for:
• Adults ages >70 years due to a potential risk
of harm, including increased risk of bleeding.
• Those ages <40 years; there is insufficient
evidence to judge the risk:benefit ratio of
routine aspirin for the primary prevention of
ASCVD in this age-group.
Reduction of CVD risk
Reassess the appropriateness of treatment at
regular intervals in case known risk factors for
increased bleeding develop, which may alter the
risk:benefit assessment.
Consider treatment discontinuation at age 70 years;
prophylactic aspirin in primary-prevention adults
ages >70 years is potentially harmful and is not
recommended on a routine basis.
Adult at high risk for ASCVD; without type 2 diabetes
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
71
=== Page 72 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
≥20% 10-year ASCVD risk
With tobacco use or exposure
Intervention Goal
Smoking cessation counseling +/-
pharmacotherapy
Advise all adults who use tobacco to quit; a
combination of behavioral interventions plus
pharmacotherapy is recommended to maximize quit
rates.
Advise all patients to avoid secondhand smoke
exposure to reduce ASCVD risk.
See Smoking cessation .
Tobacco abstinence and avoidance of second
hand smoke exposure; reduced overall risk of
ASCVD; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
72 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 73 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
With overweight (BMI=25.0-29.9 kg/m²) or obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m²)
Intervention Goal
Counseling and comprehensive lifestyle
interventions
Where feasible, refer patients for comprehensive
lifestyle interventions as part of a structured
program incorporating regular self-monitoring of
food intake, physical activity, and weight.
The ACC/AHA states that high-intensity (≥14
sessions in 6 months) comprehensive weight-loss
interventions provided by a trained interventionist
work best. However, it is noted that other modalities,
such as electronically delivered weight-loss
programs with personalized feedback and some
commercial-based programs, have also shown
moderate results.
Consider whether to offer select patients, or refer
them for, FDA-approved pharmacologic therapies
and bariatric surgery, adjunctive to complementary
lifestyle interventions.
It is recommended that BMI is interpreted with
caution in people of Asian ancestry, older adults,
and muscular adults.
See Obesity in adults .
Weight loss; reduced waist circumference;
increased physical activity; reduced caloric
intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Weight loss:
• The ACC/AHA defines clinically meaningful
weight loss as ≥5% initial weight.
Waist circumference:
• Definitions of elevated waist circumference
are ≥40 inches (≥102 cm) in men and ≥35
inches (≥88 cm) in women.
Physical activity:
• Increased physical activity, preferably aerobic
physical activity (e.g., brisk walking) for ≥150
minutes/week (equal to ≥30 minutes/day on
most days of the week), is recommended for
initial weight loss.
• Higher levels of physical activity,
approximately 200-300 minutes/week, are
recommended to maintain weight loss or
minimize weight regain after 1 year.
Reduced caloric intake:
• Caloric intake reduced by ≥500 kcal/day from
baseline, which often can be attained by
limiting women to 1200-1500 kcal/day and
men to 1500-1800 kcal/day.
• A very-low-calorie diet (defined as <800
kcal/day) is recommended only in limited
circumstances and only by trained clinicians
in a medical care setting with the patient
under medical supervision.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
73
=== Page 74 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
With moderate or severe hypercholesterolemia
Intervention Goal
Individualized management
A maximally-tolerated statin is recommended for
all patients ages 20-75 years with severe primary
hypercholesterolemia, regardless of estimated 10-
year ASCVD risk.
For patients ages >75 years, statins are not
routinely recommended, but may be considered on
a case-by-case basis depending on the individual
risk status and potential for adverse effects.
Although statins are not routinely recommended
in young adults ages 20-39 years, they
may be considered in those with moderate
hypercholesterolemia (LDL-C ≥160 mg/dL [≥4.1
mmol/L] where there is a positive family history of
premature ASCVD.
See Hypercholesterolemia .
Individualized LDL-C target; reduced overall
risk of ASCVD
See Hypercholesterolemia .
Without severe primary hypercholesterolemia (LDL-C <190 mg/dL [<4.9 mmol/L]); ages 40-75
years
Intervention Goal
High-intensity statin
For these patients, it is reasonable to use a high-
intensity statin, following a risk discussion.
For patients ages >75 years, statins are not
routinely recommended; assessment of risk status
and a clinician–patient risk discussion is needed
to decide whether to continue or initiate statin
treatment, taking into account statin safety and the
potential for statin-associated adverse effects.
Reduction in LDL-C of 50% or more; reduced
overall risk of ASCVD
74 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 75 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
With elevated blood pressure (120-129/<80 mmHg)
Intervention Goal
Nonpharmacologic treatment to lower blood
pressure
Recommend the following to patients:
• Weight loss
• A heart-healthy dietary pattern
• Sodium restriction
• Dietary potassium supplementation
• Increased physical activity with a structured
exercise program
• Limited alcohol intake
Blood pressure reduction; improved dietary
habits; increased physical activity; reduced
alcohol intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Assess adherence to, and the impact of,
nonpharmacologic treatment within 3-6 months.
Weight loss:
• The best goal is ideal body weight, but aim
for at least a 1 kg reduction in body weight for
most adults who are overweight.
Heart-healthy dietary pattern:
• Aim for consumption of a diet rich in fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy
products, with reduced content of saturated
and total fat.
Sodium restriction:
• Optimal goal is <1500 mg/day, but aim for at
least a 1000 mg/day reduction in most adults.
Dietary potassium supplementation:
• Aim for 3500-5000 mg/day, preferably by
consumption of a diet rich in potassium.
Increased physical activity:
• Aerobic exercise: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week, 65% to 75% heart rate reserve.
• Dynamic resistance: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week.
• Isometric resistance: aim for 4 × 2 minutes
(hand grip), 1 minute rest between exercises,
30% to 40% maximum voluntary contraction,
three sessions/week for 8-10 weeks.
Limited alcohol intake:
• For people who consume alcohol, reduce
consumption to ≤2 drinks daily (men) or ≤1
drink daily (women).
Blood pressure reduction:
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
75
=== Page 76 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Intervention Goal
• Follow recommendations on blood pressure
targets in line with published clinical guidance
on management of hypertension.
76 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 77 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
With stage 1 (blood pressure 130-139/80–89 mmHg) or stage 2 (blood pressure ≥140/90 mmHg)
hypertension
Intervention Goal
Nonpharmacologic treatment and medication
to lower blood pressure
Nonpharmacologic treatment:
Recommend the following to patients:
• Weight loss
• A heart-healthy dietary pattern
• Sodium restriction
• Dietary potassium supplementation
• Increased physical activity with a structured
exercise program
• Limited alcohol intake
Blood pressure lowering medication:
Offer antihypertensive medication in line with
published clinical guidance on management of
hypertension.
Blood pressure reduction (goal typically
<130/80 mmHg); improved dietary habits;
increased physical activity; reduced alcohol
intake; reduced overall risk of ASCVD
Assess adherence to, and the impact of,
nonpharmacologic treatment within 3-6 months.
Weight loss:
• The best goal is ideal body weight, but aim
for at least a 1 kg reduction in body weight for
most adults who are overweight.
Heart-healthy dietary pattern:
• Aim for consumption of a diet rich in fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy
products, with reduced content of saturated
and total fat.
Sodium restriction:
• Optimal goal is <1500 mg/day, but aim for at
least a 1000 mg/day reduction in most adults.
Dietary potassium supplementation:
• Aim for 3500-5000 mg/day, preferably by
consumption of a diet rich in potassium.
Increased physical activity:
• Aerobic exercise: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week, 65% to 75% heart rate reserve.
• Dynamic resistance: aim for 90-150 minutes/
week.
• Isometric resistance: aim for 4 × 2 minutes
(hand grip), 1 minute rest between exercises,
30% to 40% maximum voluntary contraction,
three sessions/week for 8-10 weeks.
Limited alcohol intake:
• For people who consume alcohol, reduce
consumption to ≤2 drinks daily (men) or ≤1
drink daily (women).
Blood pressure goal:
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
77
=== Page 78 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Intervention Goal
• For those requiring pharmacologic treatment
for hypertension, including those with chronic
kidney disease, a target blood pressure
<130/80 mmHg is usually recommended.
With comprehensive evaluation suggestive of a favorable risk:benefit ratio for prophylactic
aspirin; ages 40-70 years
Intervention Goal
Consider low-dose aspirin
To balance the benefits and risks, low-dose aspirin
is recommended only for select adults ages 40-70
years who are at higher ASCVD risk but not at
increased bleeding risk, following shared decision
making.
The ACC/AHH note that prophylactic aspirin
generally becomes more favorable for patients with
>10% estimated 10-year ASCVD risk. This is an
individualized decision:
• Contemporary data show that absolute
risk for ASCVD events typically exceeds
that of bleeding and, although the gap of
relative benefit to relative harm for aspirin
has narrowed, the number needed to treat to
prevent an ASCVD event remains lower than
the number needed to cause harm (bleeding).
• Some patients, in discussion with their
clinician, may feel that the benefit of
prophylactic aspirin is comparable to the
risk and may instead choose to focus on
optimal control of other modifiable ASCVD
risk factors.
Consider risk-enhancing factors +/- coronary artery
score, where available, as part of the risk:benefit
analysis.
Prophylactic aspirin is not typically recommended
for:
• Adults ages >70 years due to a potential risk
of harm, including increased risk of bleeding.
• Those ages <40 years; there is insufficient
evidence to judge the risk:benefit ratio of
routine aspirin for the primary prevention of
ASCVD in this age group.
Reduction of CVD risk
Reassess the appropriateness of treatment at
regular intervals in case known risk factors for
increased bleeding develop, which may alter the
risk:benefit assessment.
Consider treatment discontinuation at age 70 years;
prophylactic aspirin in primary-prevention adults
ages >70 years is potentially harmful and is not
recommended on a routine basis.
78 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 79 ===
Chronic coronary disease Management
Secondary prevention
All patients with known chronic coronary disease should be provided with individualized education, risk
factor modification, and guideline-directed medical therapy with the main goals of reducing the risk of future
cardiovascular events and death.
Patient discussions
Patient education should include some explanation of the disease process in addition to individualized
discussion of lifestyle, medical, and procedural treatment options. To allow for shared decision-making,
patients should be apprised of potential benefits and risks. Patient education may be particularly
important in promoting uptake of lifestyle and pharmacologic interventions that improve prognosis without
immediately altering symptoms.
Education should also include complications of coronary disease, concerning symptoms, and when to
seek care for these (e.g., to seek emergency care for angina that does not resolve rapidly with rest and/or
nitroglycerin as it may be indicative of myocardial infarction).
It can also be valuable to ask patients about any fears, lest the diagnosis of chronic coronary disease
cause excess worry or needlessly limit important activities. Patients with stable angina should be
educated on the appropriate use of as-needed sublingual nitroglycerin before or during exertion.
Patient education is endorsed by guidelines.[23] [26] When education is delivered as part of cardiac
rehabilitation, there is limited evidence of improvement in quality of life as well as selected health
behaviors and outcomes.[250] [251]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
79
=== Page 80 ===
Chronic coronary disease Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Monitoring
Monitoring
Patients should have periodic follow-up to assess for changes in symptoms and physical activity as well
as complications such as heart failure and arrhythmia. When patients have new or worsening angina,
clinicians must determine whether these can be safely managed as progressive chronic coronary disease
(CCD) or whether they reflect higher risk unstable angina requiring management as acute coronary
syndrome. Patients with progressive CCD symptoms may benefit from repeat functional or anatomic
testing and/or additional medical or procedural treatment.
Follow-up visits should also include ongoing attention to risk factors and lifestyle, including smoking,
exercise, diet, weight, and blood pressure. Adherence to medications and any side effects should be
assessed. Laboratory work should include routine screening for diabetes and monitoring of lipids and
renal function. Repeat anatomic testing is recommended only for changes in symptoms.[23][26] European
guidelines discuss adding routine echocardiography and/or functional testing every 3 to 4 years but the
US guidelines recommend against such testing.[23][26]
Initially patients might be seen every 4 to 6 months with annual visits for patients with stable regimens
and minimal symptoms.[23][26]
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
ischemic cardiomyopathy/heart failure long term medium
Patients are at risk of systolic heart failure either by irreversible loss of myocardium after myocardial
infarction or by transient dysfunction in hypoperfused tissues at times of increased activity.
myocardial infarction (MI) variable high
Occurs as a result of unstable atherosclerotic plaque with acute thrombosis and closure of the affected
coronary artery. Close adherence to secondary prevention measures reduces the likelihood of this
complication.
Patients with new severe chest pain or accelerating chest pain should seek emergency evaluation for this
possible complication.[24]
sudden cardiac death variable medium
Sudden cardiac death is the rapid cessation of cardiac activity and hemodynamic collapse with little or no
symptomatic prodrome. When reversed by defibrillation and other resuscitative measures it may also be
called sudden cardiac arrest. Coronary disease can lead to sudden cardiac death through acute ischemia
and infarction or through arrhythmia related to scar or other damage from ischemic events.
80 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 81 ===
Chronic coronary disease Follow up
Prognosis
With aggressive lifestyle modification and guideline-directed medical therapy, patients can expect a reduction
in anginal symptoms. With guideline-directed management, 58% of patients can expect to be angina-
free within 1 year.[219] Observational studies suggest spontaneous resolution of angina is also common,
although this is more true of mild angina.[249]
Ischemic heart disease is a dynamic process. Even with aggressive medical management and lifestyle
changes, some patients may experience recurrence or worsening of anginal symptoms due to progression of
atherosclerotic disease. Upward titration of antianginal medications may resolve these symptoms; however,
some patients may require revascularization to improve anginal symptoms and exercise tolerance.
The same risk factors that predispose to coronary disease increase the risk of noncoronary atherosclerotic
diseases such as stroke and peripheral artery disease. Measures taken to treat CCD may also reduce these
adverse outcomes.
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
81
=== Page 82 ===
Chronic coronary disease Guidelines
GUIDELINES
82 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 83 ===
Chronic coronary disease Guidelines
Diagnostic guidelines
International
ACC/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2023 multimodality
appropriate use criteria for the detection and risk assessment of chronic
coronary disease (https://www.acc.org/guidelines#/tab4)   [128]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; American Society of Echocardiography; American Society
of Nuclear Cardiology; American Society of Preventive Cardiology;
Heart Failure Society of America; Heart Rhythm Society; Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; Society of Cardiovascular
Computed Tomography; Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance;
Society of Thoracic Surgeons
Last published: 2023
2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the management of
patients with chronic coronary disease (https://professional.heart.org/en/
guidelines-and-statements)   [26]
Published by: American Heart Association/American College of
Cardiology/American College of Chest Physicians/American Society
for Preventive Cardiology/National Lipid Association /Preventive
Cardiovascular Nurses Association
Last published: 2023
2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation
and diagnosis of chest pain (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-
statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [24]
Published by: American Heart Association, American College of
Cardiology
Last published: 2021
ACR appropriateness criteria: chronic chest pain - high probability of
coronary artery disease (https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/Clinical-
Tools-and-Reference/Appropriateness-Criteria)   [129]
Published by: American College of Radiology Last published: 2021
Guidelines for performance, interpretation, and application of stress
echocardiography in ischemic heart disease (https://www.asecho.org/
guidelines/guidelines-standards)   [130]
Published by: American Society of Echocardiography Last published: 2020
ACR appropriateness criteria: acute nonspecific chest pain-low probability
of coronary artery disease (https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/Clinical-
Tools-and-Reference/Appropriateness-Criteria)   [131]
Published by: American College of Radiology Last published: 2020
ACR appropriateness criteria: asymptomatic patient at risk for coronary
artery disease (https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/Clinical-Tools-and-
Reference/Appropriateness-Criteria)   [132]
Published by: American College of Radiology Last published: 2020
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
83
=== Page 84 ===
Chronic coronary disease Guidelines
GUIDELINES
International
ACR appropriateness criteria: chronic chest pain - noncardiac etiology
unlikely: low to intermediate probability of coronary artery disease
(https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/Clinical-Tools-and-Reference/
Appropriateness-Criteria)   [133]
Published by: American College of Radiology Last published: 2018
Role of noninvasive testing in the clinical evaluation of women with
suspected ischemic heart disease (https://professional.heart.org/en/
guidelines-and-statements)   [134]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2014
Non-invasive imaging in coronary syndromes: recommendations of the
European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging and the American Society
of Echocardiography, in collaboration with the American Society of Nuclear
Cardiology, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and Society for
Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance (https://www.asecho.org/guideline/non-
invasive-imaging-in-coronary-syndromes)   [135]
Published by: European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging,
American Society of Echocardiography
Last published: 2022
JCS/CVIT/JCC 2023 guideline focused update on diagnosis and treatment of
vasospastic angina (coronary spastic angina) and coronary microvascular
dysfunction (https://www.j-circ.or.jp/english/cj/jcs-guidelines)   [28]
Published by: Japanese Circulation Society Last published: 2023
JCS 2022 guideline focused update on diagnosis and treatment in patients
with stable coronary artery disease (https://www.j-circ.or.jp/english/cj/jcs-
guidelines)   [136]
Published by: Japanese Circulation Society Last published: 2022
2019 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of chronic coronary
syndromes (https://www.escardio.org/Guidelines)   [23]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2019
84 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 85 ===
Chronic coronary disease Guidelines
Treatment guidelines
International
2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the management of
patients with chronic coronary disease (https://professional.heart.org/en/
guidelines-and-statements)   [26]
Published by: American Heart Association; American College of
Cardiology; American College of Chest Physicians; American Society
for Preventive Cardiology; National Lipid Association; Preventive
Cardiovascular Nurses Association
Last published: 2023
Canadian Cardiovascular Society/Canadian Association of Interventional
Cardiology 2023 focused update of the guidelines for the use of antiplatelet
therapy (https://ccs.ca/guidelines-and-clinical-practice-update-library)   [244]
Published by: Canadian Cardiovascular Society; Canadian Association
of Interventional Cardiology
Last published: 2023
2022 ACC expert consensus decision pathway for integrating atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease and multimorbidity treatment: a framework for
pragmatic, patient-centered care: a report of the American College of
Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee (https://www.acc.org/
guidelines)   [245]
Published by: American College of Cardiology Last published: 2023
2022 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on the role of nonstatin
therapies for LDL-cholesterol lowering in the management of atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease risk (https://www.acc.org/guidelines)   [239]
Published by: American College of Cardiology Last published: 2022
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery revascularization (https://
professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements)   [212]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association
Last published: 2021
AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/
PCNA guideline on the management of blood cholesterol (https://
professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements)   [44]
Published by: American Heart Association; American College of
Cardiology; American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary
Rehabilitation; American Association Academy of Physician Assistants;
Association of Black Cardiologists; American College of Preventive
Medicine; American Diabetes Association; American Geriatrics Society;
American Pharmacists Association; American Society for Preventive
Cardiology; National Lipid Association; Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses
Association
Last published: 2018
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
85
=== Page 86 ===
Chronic coronary disease Guidelines
GUIDELINES
International
ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/SCAI/SCCT/STS 2017 appropriate use criteria for
coronary revascularization in patients with stable ischemic heart disease
(https://www.acc.org/guidelines#/tab4)   [214]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; American Association for Thoracic Surgery; American
Society of Echocardiography; American Society of Nuclear Cardiology;
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; Society of
Cardiovascular Computed Tomography; Society of Thoracic Surgeons
Last published: 2017
2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration of dual antiplatelet
therapy in patients with coronary artery disease (https://www.acc.org/
guidelines)   [165]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association
Last published: 2016
AHA/ACCF secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy for patients
with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease (https://
professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements)   [246]
Published by: American Heart Association; American College of
Cardiology Foundation
Last published: 2011
Effectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention of cardiovascular disease
in women (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements)   [247]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2011
2022 ESC guidelines on cardio-oncology developed in collaboration with
the European Hematology Association (EHA), the European Society for
Therapeutic radiology and oncology (ESTRO) and the International Cardio-
Oncology Society (IC-OS) (https://www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-
Practice-Guidelines/Cardio-oncology-guidelines)   [248]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2022
2019 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of chronic coronary
syndromes (https://www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-
Guidelines)   [23]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2019
2017 ESC focused update on dual antiplatelet therapy in coronary artery
disease developed in collaboration with EACTS (https://www.escardio.org/
Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [166]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology; European Association
for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery
Last published: 2017
86 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 87 ===
Chronic coronary disease Online resources
Online resources
1. SCORE2 and SCORE2-OP risk assessment models (https://www.escardio.org/Education/Practice-
Tools/CVD-prevention-toolbox/SCORE-Risk-Charts)  (external link)
ONLINE RESOURCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
87
=== Page 88 ===
Chronic coronary disease Evidence tables
EVIDENCE TABLES
Evidence tables
What are the effects of patient education on management of coronary heart
disease?
This table is a summary of the analysis reported in a Cochrane Clinical Answer that focuses on the
above important clinical question.
View the full source Cochrane Clinical Answer (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cca/
doi/10.1002/cca.1777/full)
Evidence C * Confidence in the evidence is very low or low where GRADE has been performed
and there may be no difference in effectiveness between the intervention and
comparison for key outcomes. However, this is uncertain and new evidence could
change this in the future.
Population: Adults aged 51-73 years with coronary heart disease
Intervention: Patient education ᵃ 
 Comparison: Usual medical care (typically referral to an outpatient cardiologist, primary care physician, or
both)
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
Total mortality at the end of the
follow-up period (median 18
months)
No statistically significant
difference
Moderate
Fatal and/or non‐fatal MI at
the end of the follow-up period
(median 33 months)
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Total revascularizations
(including CABG and PCI)
(median follow‐up 36 months)
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Cardiac hospitalizations
(median follow‐up 12 months)
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
All-cause withdrawal/drop‐out
(median follow‐up 12 months)
No statistically significant
difference
Low
Quality of life (median follow‐
up 12 months)
See note ᵇ Moderate
Note
88 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 89 ===
Chronic coronary disease Evidence tables
The Cochrane review which underpins this Cochrane Clinical Answer (CCA) notes that due to the
limited quality and lack of certainty of the evidence, patient education should be used only as part of a
comprehensive programme which includes exercise and psychological support, which reflects international
guidance.
ᵃ  Education interventions varied in what was delivered, who delivered it, and the intensity and duration of the
intervention. See the CCA for more details.
ᵇ  Results were inconsistent with most finding no difference although some favored the intervention; a number
of different scales were used to measure quality of life so results could not be meta-analyzed and are
therefore reported narratively. See the CCA for more details.
* Evidence levels
The Evidence level is an internal rating applied by BMJ Best Practice. See the EBM Toolkit (https://
bestpractice.bmj.com/info/evidence-tables/) for details.
Confidence in evidence
A -  High or moderate to high
B -  Moderate or low to moderate
C -  Very low or low
† Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
Based on statistical significance, which demonstrates that the results are unlikely to be due to chance, but
which does not necessarily translate to a clinical significance.
‡ Grade certainty ratings
High The authors are very confident that the true
effect is similar to the estimated effect.
Moderate The authors are moderately confident that
the true effect is likely to be close to the
estimated effect.
Low The authors have limited confidence in the
effect estimate and the true effect may be
substantially different.
Very Low The authors have very little confidence in
the effect estimate and the true effect is
likely to be substantially different.
BMJ Best Practice EBM Toolkit: What is GRADE? (https://bestpractice.bmj.com/info/toolkit/learn-ebm/what-
is-grade/)
EVIDENCE TABLES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
89
=== Page 90 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
Key articles
• Knuuti J, Wijns W, Saraste A, et al. 2019 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of chronic
coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J. 2020 Jan 14;41(3):407-77.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/41/3/407/5556137)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31504439?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline
for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2021 Nov
30;144(22):e368-454.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34709879?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the
management of patients with chronic coronary disease: a report of the American Heart Association/
American College of Cardiology joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2023 Aug
29;148(9):e9-119.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37471501?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/
APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of blood cholesterol: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on clinical practice
guidelines. Circulation. 2019 Jun 18;139(25):e1082-143.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000625)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30586774?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration
of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery disease: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016 Nov;152(5):1243-75. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27751237?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. Marzilli M, Merz CN, Boden WE, et al. Obstructive coronary atherosclerosis and ischemic
heart disease: an elusive link! J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Sep 11;60(11):951-6.  Full text (https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109712022929?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22954239?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Pepine CJ, Douglas PS. Rethinking stable ischemic heart disease: is this the beginning of a new era?
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012 Sep 11;60(11):957-9.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0735109712022930?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22954240?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
90 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 91 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
3. Canadian Cardiovascular Society. Canadian Cardiovascular Society grading of angina pectoris. 1976
[internet publication].  Full text (https://www.msdmanuals.com/professional/multimedia/table/canadian-
cardiovascular-society-classification-system-for-angina-pectoris)
4. Roth GA, Johnson C, Abajobir A, et al. Global, regional, and national burden of cardiovascular
diseases for 10 causes, 1990 to 2015. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 Jul 4;70(1):1-25.  Full text (https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109717372443?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28527533?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. GBD 2016 Causes of Death Collaborators. Global, regional, and national age-sex specific mortality for
264 causes of death, 1980-2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016.
Lancet. 2017 Sep 16;390(10100):1151-210.  Full text (https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/
article/PIIS0140-6736(17)32152-9/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28919116?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. Martin SS, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. 2024 heart disease and stroke statistics: a report of US
and global data from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2024 Feb 20;149(8):e347-913. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001209)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38264914?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Lloyd-Jones DM, Larson MG, Beiser A, et al. Lifetime risk of developing coronary heart disease.
Lancet. 1999 Jan 9;353(9147):89-92. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10023892?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. GBD 2019 Diseases and Injuries Collaborators. Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204
countries and territories, 1990-2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2019. Lancet. 2020 Oct 17;396(10258):1204-22.  Full text (https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/
article/PIIS0140-6736(20)30925-9/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33069326?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Lerner DJ, Kannel WB. Patterns of coronary heart disease morbidity and mortality in the sexes: a 26-
year follow-up of the Framingham population. Am Heart J. 1986 Feb;111(2):383-90. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3946178?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Cho L, Davis M, Elgendy I, et al. Summary of updated recommendations for primary prevention
of cardiovascular disease in women: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020 May
26;75(20):2602-18.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109720347537)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32439010?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Mirzaei M, Truswell AS, Taylor R, et al. Coronary heart disease epidemics: not all the same.
Heart. 2009 May;95(9):740-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19095711?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Timmis A, Vardas P, Townsend N, et al. European Society of Cardiology: cardiovascular disease
statistics 2021. Eur Heart J. 2022 Feb 22;43(8):716-99.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/
article/43/8/716/6472699?login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35016208?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
91
=== Page 92 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
13. Ford ES, Ajani UA, Croft JB, et al. Explaining the decrease in U.S. deaths from coronary disease,
1980-2000. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jun 7;356(23):2388-98.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJMsa053935)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17554120?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Gaziano JM. Fifth phase of the epidemiologic transition: the age of obesity and inactivity.
JAMA. 2010 Jan 20;303(3):275-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20071469?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Chen W, Li Z, Zhao Y, et al. Global and national burden of atherosclerosis from 1990 to
2019: trend analysis based on the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Chin Med J (Engl).
2023 Oct 20;136(20):2442-50.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/cmj/fulltext/2023/10200/
global_and_national_burden_of_atherosclerosis_from.6.aspx)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37677929?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Zdravkovic S, Wienke A, Pedersen NL, et al. Heritability of death from coronary heart disease:
a 36-year follow-up of 20 966 Swedish twins. J Intern Med. 2002 Sep;252(3):247-54.  Full text
(https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1046/j.1365-2796.2002.01029.x)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12270005?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Lloyd-Jones DM, Nam BH, D'Agostino RB Sr, et al. Parental cardiovascular disease as a risk factor
for cardiovascular disease in middle-aged adults: a prospective study of parents and offspring. JAMA.
2004 May 12;291(18):2204-11.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/198726)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15138242?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention
of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019 Sep 10;140(11):e596-
e646.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000678)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30879355?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Havranek EP, Mujahid MS, Barr DA, et al. Social determinants of risk and outcomes for cardiovascular
disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015 Sep
1;132(9):873-98.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000228)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26240271?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Khaing W, Vallibhakara SA, Attia J, et al. Effects of education and income on cardiovascular
outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2017 Jul;24(10):1032-42.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28406328?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Agewall S, Beltrame JF, Reynolds HR, et al. ESC working group position paper on myocardial
infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries. Eur Heart J. 2017 Jan 14;38(3):143-53.  Full text
(https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/38/3/143/2967570)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28158518?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Tamis-Holland JE, Jneid H, Reynolds HR, et al. Contemporary diagnosis and management of patients
with myocardial infarction in the absence of obstructive coronary artery disease: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2019 Apr 30;139(18):e891-e908.  Full text (https://
92 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 93 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000670)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30913893?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Knuuti J, Wijns W, Saraste A, et al. 2019 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of chronic
coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J. 2020 Jan 14;41(3):407-77.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/41/3/407/5556137)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31504439?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline
for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2021 Nov
30;144(22):e368-454.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34709879?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Ford TJ, Stanley B, Good R, et al. Stratified medical therapy using invasive coronary function
testing in angina: the CorMicA trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Dec 11;72(23 pt a):2841-55.  Full
text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109718383815)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30266608?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, et al. 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the
management of patients with chronic coronary disease: a report of the American Heart Association/
American College of Cardiology joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2023 Aug
29;148(9):e9-119.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37471501?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Kunadian V, Chieffo A, Camici PG, et al. An EAPCI expert consensus document on ischaemia with
non-obstructive coronary arteries in collaboration with European Society of Cardiology Working
Group on Coronary Pathophysiology and Microcirculation endorsed by Coronary Vasomotor
Disorders International Study Group. Eur Heart J. 2020 Oct 1;41(37):3504-20.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/41/37/3504/5867624)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/32626906?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Hokimoto S, Kaikita K, Yasuda S, et al. JCS/CVIT/JCC 2023 guideline focused update on diagnosis
and treatment of vasospastic angina (coronary spastic angina) and coronary microvascular
dysfunction. Circ J. 2023 May 25;87(6):879-936.  Full text (https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/
circj/87/6/87_CJ-22-0779/_html/-char/en)
29. Hayes SN, Kim ESH, Saw J, et al. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection: current state of
the science: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2018 May
8;137(19):e523-57.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000564)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29472380?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Falk E, Nakano M, Bentzon JF, et al. Update on acute coronary syndromes: the pathologists'
view. Eur Heart J. 2013 Mar;34(10):719-28.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/
article/34/10/719/496744)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23242196?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
93
=== Page 94 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
31. Libby P. Mechanisms of acute coronary syndromes and their implications for therapy. N Engl J
Med. 2013 May 23;368(21):2004-13. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23697515?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Gould KL. Does coronary flow trump coronary anatomy? JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2009
Aug;2(8):1009-23.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1936878X09004252?
via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19679290?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Visseren FLJ, Mach F, Smulders YM, et al. 2021 ESC guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention
in clinical practice. Eur Heart J. 2021 Sep 7;42(34):3227-37.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/42/34/3227/6358713)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34458905?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Yusuf S, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, et al. Effect of potentially modifiable risk factors associated
with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the INTERHEART study): case-control study. Lancet.
2004 Sep 11-17;364(9438):937-52. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15364185?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular
mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet.
2002 Dec 14;360(9349):1903-13. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12493255?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. Ettehad D, Emdin CA, Kiran A, et al. Blood pressure lowering for prevention of cardiovascular disease
and death: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2016 Mar 5;387(10022):957-67. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26724178?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Thomopoulos C, Parati G, Zanchetti A. Effects of blood pressure lowering on outcome incidence
in hypertension. 1. Overview, meta-analyses, and meta-regression analyses of randomized trials.
J Hypertens. 2014 Dec;32(12):2285-95. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25255397?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Emerging risk factors collaboration, Sarwar N, Gao P, et al. Diabetes mellitus, fasting blood glucose
concentration, and risk of vascular disease: a collaborative meta-analysis of 102 prospective studies.
Lancet. 2010 Jun 26;375(9733):2215-22.  Full text (https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/
PIIS0140-6736(10)60484-9/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20609967?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Aronson D, Edelman ER. Coronary artery disease and diabetes mellitus. Cardiol Clin. 2014
Aug;32(3):439-55.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4672945)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25091969?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Arnold SV, Bhatt DL, Barsness GW, et al. Clinical management of stable coronary artery
disease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2020 May 12;141(19):e779-806.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/
full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000766)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32279539?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
94 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 95 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
41. Thompson PD, Buchner D, Piña IL, et al. Exercise and physical activity in the prevention
and treatment of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a statement from the Council on
Clinical Cardiology (Subcommittee on Exercise, Rehabilitation, and Prevention) and the
Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism (Subcommittee on Physical Activity).
Circulation. 2003 Jun 24;107(24):3109-16.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/
full/10.1161/01.cir.0000075572.40158.77)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12821592?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Sarnak MJ, Levey AS, Schoolwerth AC, et al. Kidney disease as a risk factor for development of
cardiovascular disease: a statement from the American Heart Association Councils on Kidney in
Cardiovascular Disease, High Blood Pressure Research, Clinical Cardiology, and Epidemiology
and Prevention. Circulation. 2003 Oct 28;108(17):2154-69.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/01.CIR.0000095676.90936.80)
43. Ndumele CE, Rangaswami J, Chow SL, et al. Cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic health: a presidential
advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023 Nov 14;148(20):1606-35. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001184)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37807924?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/
APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of blood cholesterol: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on clinical practice
guidelines. Circulation. 2019 Jun 18;139(25):e1082-143.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000625)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30586774?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Carrillo-Estrada M, Bobrowski D, Carrasco R, et al. Coronary artery disease in patients with cancer:
challenges and opportunities for improvement. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2021 Sep 1;36(5):597-608.  Full
text (https://www.doi.org/10.1097/HCO.0000000000000878)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34397466?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Mitchell JD, Cehic DA, Morgia M, et al. Cardiovascular manifestations from therapeutic radiation: a
multidisciplinary expert consensus statement from the International Cardio-Oncology Society. JACC
CardioOncol. 2021 Sep 21;3(3):360-80.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S2666087321001496?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34604797?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Beavers CJ, Rodgers JE, Bagnola AJ, et al. Cardio-oncology drug interactions: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2022 Apr 12;145(15):e811-38.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001056)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35249373?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Powell-Wiley TM, Poirier P, Burke LE, et al. Obesity and cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2021 May 25;143(21):e984-1010.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000973)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33882682?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Bogers RP, Bemelmans WJ, Hoogenveen RT, et al. Association of overweight with increased
risk of coronary heart disease partly independent of blood pressure and cholesterol
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
95
=== Page 96 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
levels: a meta-analysis of 21 cohort studies including more than 300 000 persons. Arch
Intern Med. 2007 Sep 10;167(16):1720-8.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/journals/
jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/413025)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17846390?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Rao G, Powell-Wiley TM, Ancheta I, et al. Identification of obesity and cardiovascular risk in ethnically
and racially diverse populations: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2015 Aug 4;132(5):457-72.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000223)
51. Talarico GP, Crosta ML, Giannico MB, et al. Cocaine and coronary artery diseases: a systematic
review of the literature. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2017 May;18(5):291-4. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28306693?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Akasaki Y, Ohishi M. Cerebrovascular and cardiovascular diseases caused by drugs of abuse.
Hypertens Res. 2020 May;43(5):363-71. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31801994?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Kaufman JD, Adar SD, Barr RG, et al. Association between air pollution and coronary artery
calcification within six metropolitan areas in the USA (the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis and
Air Pollution): a longitudinal cohort study. Lancet. 2016 Aug 13;388(10045):696-704. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27233746?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Hoek G, Krishnan RM, Beelen R, et al. Long-term air pollution exposure and cardio-
respiratory mortality: a review. Environ Health. 2013 May 28;12(1):43.  Full text (https://
ehjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1476-069X-12-43)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23714370?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Rajagopalan S, Landrigan PJ. Pollution and the heart. N Engl J Med. 2021 Nov 11;385(20):1881-92. 
Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMra2030281)
56. Alexeeff SE, Liao NS, Liu X, et al. Long-term PM(2.5) exposure and risks of ischemic heart disease
and stroke events: review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Jan 5;10(1):e016890.  Full
text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMra2030281)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33381983?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. McGuinn LA, Ward-Caviness CK, Neas LM, et al. Association between satellite-based estimates of
long-term PM2.5 exposure and coronary artery disease. Environ Res. 2016 Feb;145:9-17. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26613345?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58. Lloyd-Jones DM, Allen NB, Anderson CAM, et al. Life's essential 8: updating and enhancing
the American Heart Association's construct of cardiovascular health: a presidential advisory
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2022 Aug 2;146(5):e18-e43.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001078)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35766027?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. US Preventive Services Task Force. Healthy diet and physical activity for cardiovascular disease
prevention in adults with cardiovascular risk factors: behavioral counseling interventions. Nov 2020
96 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 97 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
[internet publication].  Full text (https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/
healthy-diet-and-physical-activity-counseling-adults-with-high-risk-of-cvd)
60. US Preventive Services Task Force. Healthy diet and physical activity for cardiovascular disease
prevention in adults without cardiovascular disease risk factors: behavioral counseling interventions.
Jul 2022 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/
recommendation/healthy-lifestyle-and-physical-activity-for-cvd-prevention-adults-without-known-risk-
factors-behavioral-counseling)
61. World Health Organization. WHO guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour. Nov 2020
[internet publication].  Full text (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240015128)
62. US Preventive Services Task Force. Statin use for the primary prevention of cardiovascular
disease in adults: preventive medication. Aug 2022 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/statin-use-in-adults-preventive-
medication)
63. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Cardiovascular disease: risk assessment
and reduction, including lipid modification. Dec 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng238)
64. US Preventive Services Task Force. Aspirin use to prevent cardiovascular disease: preventive
medication. April 2022 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/
uspstf/recommendation/aspirin-to-prevent-cardiovascular-disease-preventive-medication)
65. Diamond GA, Forrester JS. Analysis of probability as an aid in the clinical diagnosis of coronary-
artery disease. N Engl J Med. 1979 Jun 14;300(24):1350-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/440357?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Genders TS, Steyerberg EW, Alkadhi H, et al. A clinical prediction rule for the diagnosis of coronary
artery disease: validation, updating, and extension. Eur Heart J. 2011 Jun;32(11):1316-30. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/32/11/1316/2398002)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21367834?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Juarez-Orozco LE, Saraste A, Capodanno D, et al. Impact of a decreasing pre-test probability on the
performance of diagnostic tests for coronary artery disease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019
Nov 1;20(11):1198-207.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/ehjcimaging/article/20/11/1198/5456837) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30982851?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. Anderson HVS, Masri SC, Abdallah MS, et al. 2022 ACC/AHA key data elements and definitions
for chest pain and acute myocardial infarction: A report of the American Heart Association/
American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Data Standards. Circ Cardiovasc
Qual Outcomes. 2022 Oct;15(10):e000112.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/
HCQ.0000000000000112?rfr_dat=cr_pub++0pubmed&url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori
%3Arid%3Acrossref.org)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36041014?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
97
=== Page 98 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
69. Chun AA, McGee SR. Bedside diagnosis of coronary artery disease: a systematic review. Am
J Med. 2004 Sep 1;117(5):334-43. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15336583?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. Levine HJ. Difficult problems in the diagnosis of chest pain. Am Heart J. 1980 Jul;100(1):108-18.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6770665?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
71. Multimodality Writing Group for Chronic Coronary Disease, Winchester DE, Maron DJ, et al. ACC/
AHA/ASE/ASNC/ASPC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2023 multimodality appropriate use
criteria for the detection and risk assessment of chronic coronary disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 Jun
27;81(25):2445-67.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109723052233?
via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37245131?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Pryor DB, Shaw L, McCants CB, et al. Value of the history and physical in identifying patients at
increased risk for coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med. 1993 Jan 15;118(2):81-90. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8416322?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Weiner DA, Ryan TJ, McCabe CH, et al. Exercise stress testing. Correlations among history of angina,
ST-segment response and prevalence of coronary-artery disease in the Coronary Artery Surgery
Study (CASS). N Engl J Med. 1979 Aug 2;301(5):230-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/449990?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74. Agha AM, Pacor J, Grandhi GR, et al. The prognostic value of CAC zero among individuals presenting
with chest pain: a meta-analysis. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2022 Oct;15(10):1745-57.  Full text
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1936878X22002443?via%3Dihub)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36202453?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
75. US Preventive Services Task Force., Curry SJ, Krist AH, et al. Risk assessment for cardiovascular
disease with nontraditional risk factors: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. JAMA. 2018 Jul 17;320(3):272-80.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/journals/
jama/fullarticle/2687225)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29998297?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, et al; PROMISE Investigators. Outcomes of anatomical versus
functional testing for coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2015 Apr 2;372(14):1291-300.  Full text
(https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1415516)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25773919?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
77. Skelly AC, Hashimoto R, Buckley DI, et al. Noninvasive testing for coronary artery disease.
Comparative effectiveness reviews, no. 171. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality (US); 2016:1-363.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/PMH0087137)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27148617?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
78. SCOT-HEART Investigators. CT coronary angiography in patients with suspected angina due to
coronary heart disease (SCOT-HEART): an open-label, parallel-group, multicentre trial. Lancet.
2015 Jun 13;385(9985):2383-91.  Full text (https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/
PIIS0140-6736(15)60291-4/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25788230?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
98 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 99 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
79. McKavanagh P, Lusk L, Ball PA, et al. A comparison of cardiac computerized tomography and exercise
stress electrocardiogram test for the investigation of stable chest pain: the clinical results of the CAPP
randomized prospective trial. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015 Apr;16(4):441-8.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/ehjcimaging/article/16/4/441/2397463)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25473041?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80. Min JK, Koduru S, Dunning AM, et al. Coronary CT angiography versus myocardial perfusion imaging
for near-term quality of life, cost and radiation exposure: a prospective multicenter randomized pilot
trial. J Cardiovasc Comput Tomogr. 2012 Jul-Aug;6(4):274-83. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22732201?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
81. Zito A, Galli M, Biondi-Zoccai G, et al. Diagnostic strategies for the assessment of suspected
stable coronary artery disease : a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med.
2023 Jun;176(6):817-26. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37276592?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82. Okin PM, Kligfield P. Gender-specific criteria and performance of the exercise electrocardiogram.
Circulation. 1995 Sep 1;92(5):1209-16.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/01.CIR.92.5.1209)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7648667?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
83. Shaw LJ, Mieres JH, Hendel RH, et al; WOMEN Trial Investigators. Comparative effectiveness of
exercise electrocardiography with or without myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed
tomography in women with suspected coronary artery disease: results from the What Is the Optimal
Method for Ischemia Evaluation in Women (WOMEN) trial. Circulation. 2011 Sep 13;124(11):1239-49. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.029660)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21844080?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
84. Shaw LJ, Peterson ED, Shaw LK, et al. Use of a prognostic treadmill score in identifying
diagnostic coronary disease subgroups. Circulation. 1998 Oct 20;98(16):1622-30. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9778327?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
85. Lauer MS, Pothier CE, Magid DJ, et al. An externally validated model for predicting long-term
survival after exercise treadmill testing in patients with suspected coronary artery disease and
a normal electrocardiogram. Ann Intern Med. 2007 Dec 18;147(12):821-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18087052?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
86. Hachamovitch R, Berman DS, Kiat H, et al. Exercise myocardial perfusion SPECT in patients
without known coronary artery disease: incremental prognostic value and use in risk stratification.
Circulation. 1996 Mar 1;93(5):905-14. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8598081?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
87. Marwick TH, Case C, Vasey C, et al. Prediction of mortality by exercise echocardiography: a strategy
for combination with the Duke treadmill score. Circulation. 2001 May 29;103(21):2566-71. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11382725?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
88. Hoffmann U, Ferencik M, Udelson JE, et al; PROMISE Investigators. Prognostic value of noninvasive
cardiovascular testing in patients with stable chest pain: insights from the PROMISE trial (Prospective
Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain). Circulation. 2017 Jun 13;135(24):2320-32. 
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
99
=== Page 100 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.116.024360)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28389572?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
89. Xie JX, Cury RC, Leipsic J, et al. The Coronary Artery Disease-Reporting and Data System (CAD-
RADS): prognostic and clinical implications associated with standardized coronary computed
tomography angiography reporting. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2018 Jan;11(1):78-89. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29301713?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
90. Andreini D, Pontone G, Mushtaq S, et al. A long-term prognostic value of coronary CT angiography in
suspected coronary artery disease. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012 Jul;5(7):690-701.  Full text (http://
imaging.onlinejacc.org/content/5/7/690)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22789937?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
91. Froelicher VF, Lehmann KG, Thomas R, et al. The electrocardiographic exercise test in a population
with reduced workup bias: diagnostic performance, computerized interpretation, and multivariable
prediction. Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study in Health Services #016 (QUEXTA) Study Group.
Quantitative exercise testing and angiography. Ann Intern Med. 1998 Jun 15;128(12 pt 1):965-74.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9625682?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
92. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Recent-onset chest pain of suspected cardiac
origin: assessment and diagnosis. Nov 2016 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/cg95)
93. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network. Management of stable angina: a national clinical
guideline. Apr 2018 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.sign.ac.uk/sign-151-stable-angina)
94. SCOT-HEART Investigators., Newby DE, Adamson PD, et al. Coronary CT angiography and 5-
year risk of myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2018 Sep 6;379(10):924-33.  Full text (https://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1805971)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30145934?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
95. Maddox TM, Stanislawski MA, Grunwald GK, et al. Nonobstructive coronary artery disease and risk
of myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2014 Nov 5;312(17):1754-63.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jama/fullarticle/1920971)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25369489?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
96. Tonino PA, Fearon WF, De Bruyne B, et al. Angiographic versus functional severity of coronary artery
stenoses in the FAME study: fractional flow reserve versus angiography in multivessel evaluation. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Jun 22;55(25):2816-21.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/55/25/2816)
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20579537?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
97. Pijls NH, De Bruyne B, Peels K, et al. Measurement of fractional flow reserve to assess the functional
severity of coronary-artery stenoses. N Engl J Med. 1996 Jun 27;334(26):1703-8.  Full text (https://
www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJM199606273342604)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/8637515?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
98. Barbato E, Toth GG, Johnson NP, et al. A prospective natural history study of coronary atherosclerosis
using fractional flow reserve. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016 Nov 29;68(21):2247-55.  Full text (http://
100 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 101 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
www.onlinejacc.org/content/68/21/2247)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27884241?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
99. Mach F, Baigent C, Catapano AL, et al. 2019 ESC/EAS guidelines for the management of
dyslipidaemias: lipid modification to reduce cardiovascular risk. Eur Heart J. 2020 Jan 1;41(1):111-88. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/41/1/111/5556353)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31504418?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
100. Winther S, Schmidt SE, Mayrhofer T, et al. Incorporating coronary calcification into pre-
test assessment of the likelihood of coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020 Nov
24;76(21):2421-32.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109720373678?
via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33213720?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
101. Villines TC, Hulten EA, Shaw LJ, et al; CONFIRM Registry Investigators. Prevalence and severity
of coronary artery disease and adverse events among symptomatic patients with coronary
artery calcification scores of zero undergoing coronary computed tomography angiography:
results from the CONFIRM (Coronary CT Angiography Evaluation for Clinical Outcomes: An
International Multicenter) registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011 Dec 6;58(24):2533-40.  Full text (http://
www.onlinejacc.org/content/58/24/2533)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22079127?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
102. Wieske V, Walther M, Dubourg B, et al. Computed tomography angiography versus Agatston score for
diagnosis of coronary artery disease in patients with stable chest pain: individual patient data meta-
analysis of the international COME-CCT Consortium. Eur Radiol. 2022 Aug;32(8):5233-45.  Full text
(https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00330-022-08619-4)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35267094?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
103. Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography. Five things physicians and patients should
question. Choosing Wisely, an initiative of the ABIM Foundation. 2021 [internet publication].  Full text
(https://web.archive.org/web/20221003082824/https://www.choosingwisely.org/societies/society-of-
cardiovascular-computed-tomography)
104. Orringer CE, Blaha MJ, Blankstein R, et al. The National Lipid Association scientific statement on
coronary artery calcium scoring to guide preventive strategies for ASCVD risk reduction. J Clin
Lipidol. 2021 Jan-Feb;15(1):33-60. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33419719?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
105. American College of Cardiology. Five things physicians and patients should question. Choosing
Wisely, an initiative of the ABIM Foundation. Feb 2023. [internet publication].  Full text (https://
web.archive.org/web/20230402075927/https://www.choosingwisely.org/societies/american-college-of-
cardiology)
106. Hamon M, Geindreau D, Guittet L, et al. Additional diagnostic value of new CT imaging
techniques for the functional assessment of coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. Eur
Radiol. 2019 Jun;29(6):3044-61. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30617482?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
107. Celeng C, Leiner T, Maurovich-Horvat P, et al. Anatomical and functional computed tomography for
diagnosing hemodynamically significant coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. JACC Cardiovasc
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
101
=== Page 102 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
Imaging. 2019 Jul;12(7 pt 2):1316-25.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1936878X18306818?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30219398?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
108. Patel AR, Bamberg F, Branch K, et al. Society of cardiovascular computed tomography expert
consensus document on myocardial computed tomography perfusion imaging. J Cardiovasc Comput
Tomogr. 2020 Jan - Feb;14(1):87-100. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32122795?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
109. Culić V, Eterović D, Mirić D, et al. Symptom presentation of acute myocardial infarction: influence of
sex, age, and risk factors. Am Heart J. 2002 Dec;144(6):1012-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12486425?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
110. Shaw LJ, Bairey Merz CN, Pepine CJ, et al. Insights from the NHLBI-Sponsored Women's Ischemia
Syndrome Evaluation (WISE) study: part I: gender differences in traditional and novel risk factors,
symptom evaluation, and gender-optimized diagnostic strategies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Feb 7;47(3
suppl):S4-S20.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109705025064?via
%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16458170?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
111. Canto JG, Goldberg RJ, Hand MM, et al. Symptom presentation of women with acute
coronary syndromes: myth vs reality. Arch Intern Med. 2007 Dec 10;167(22):2405-13.  Full text
(https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/770038)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18071161?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
112. Junghans C, Sekhri N, Zaman MJ, et al. Atypical chest pain in diabetic patients with suspected stable
angina: impact on diagnosis and coronary outcomes. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 2015 Jul
1;1(1):37-43.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/ehjqcco/article/1/1/37/1860137)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29474566?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
113. Pontone G, Baggiano A, Andreini D, et al. Stress computed tomography perfusion versus fractional
flow reserve CT derived in suspected coronary artery disease: the PERFECTION study. JACC
Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019 Aug;12(8 pt 1):1487-97.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1936878X18307514?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30343073?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
114. Kass SM, Williams PM, Reamy BV. Pleurisy. Am Fam Physician. 2007 May 1;75(9):1357-64. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17508531?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
115. Sutton FM, Graham DY, Goodgame RW. Infectious esophagitis. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am. 1994
Oct;4(4):713-29. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7812643?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
116. Kikendall JW. Pill esophagitis. J Clin Gastroenterol. 1999 Jun;28(4):298-305. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10372925?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
117. Richter JE. Oesophageal motility disorders. Lancet. 2001 Sep 8;358(9284):823-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11564508?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
102 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 103 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
118. Richter JE. Gastrooesophageal reflux disease. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2007;21(4):609-31.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17643904?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
119. Mackay S, Dillane P. Biliary pain. Aust Fam Physician. 2004 Dec;33(12):977-81.  Full text (https://
www.racgp.org.au/afp/200412/14257)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15630917?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
120. Sanders G, Kingsnorth AN. Gallstones. BMJ. 2007 Aug 11;335(7614):295-9. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17690370?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
121. Caddy GR, Tham TC. Gallstone disease: symptoms, diagnosis, and endoscopic management of
common bile duct stones. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2006;20(6):1085-101. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17127190?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
122. Ramakrishnan K, Salinas RC. Peptic ulcer disease. Am Fam Physician. 2007 Oct 1;76(7):1005-12.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17956071?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
123. Chakrabarty S, Zoorob R. Fibromyalgia. Am Fam Physician. 2007 Jul 15;76(2):247-54. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17695569?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
124. Hassett G, Barnsley L. Pain referral from the sternoclavicular joint: a study in normal volunteers.
Rheumatology (Oxford). 2001 Aug;40(8):859-62.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/rheumatology/
article/40/8/859/1783910)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11511753?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
125. Wareham DW, Breuer J. Herpes zoster. BMJ. 2007 Jun 9;334(7605):1211-5. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17556477?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
126. Gale CK, Oakley-Browne M. Generalized anxiety disorder. Am Fam Physician. 2003 Jan
1;67(1):135-8.  Full text (https://www.aafp.org/afp/2003/0101/p135.html)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12537176?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
127. Weinstein RS. Panic disorder. Am Fam Physician. 1995 Nov 15;52(7):2055-63, 2067-8. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7484706?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
128. Wolk MJ, Bailey SR, Doherty JU, et al. ACCF/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/
STS 2013 multimodality appropriate use criteria for the detection and risk assessment of
stable ischemic heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Feb 4;63(4):380-406.  Full text (http://
www.onlinejacc.org/content/63/4/380)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24355759?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
129. American College of Radiology. ACR appropriateness criteria: chronic chest pain - high probability of
coronary artery disease. 2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/69405/
Narrative)
130. Pellikka PA, Arruda-Olson A, Chaudhry FA, et al. Guidelines for performance, interpretation, and
application of stress echocardiography in ischemic heart disease: from the American Society of
Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2020 Jan;33(1):1-41.e8.  Full text (https://www.asecho.org/
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
103
=== Page 104 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Stress-Echo-2020.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31740370?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
131. American College of Radiology. ACR appropriateness criteria: acute nonspecific chest pain-low
probability of coronary artery disease. 2020 [internet publication].  Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/
docs/69401/Narrative)
132. American College of Radiology. ACR appropriateness criteria: asymptomatic patient at risk for
coronary artery disease. 2020 [internet publication].  Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3082570/
Narrative)
133. American College of Radiology. ACR appropriateness criteria: chronic chest pain - noncardiac etiology
unlikely: low to intermediate probability of coronary artery disease. 2018 [internet publication].  Full text
(https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/69337/Narrative)
134. Mieres JH, Gulati M, Bairey Merz N, et al; American Heart Association Cardiac Imaging Committee
of the Council on Clinical Cardiology and the Cardiovascular Imaging and Intervention Committee
of the Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention. Role of noninvasive testing in the
clinical evaluation of women with suspected ischemic heart disease: a consensus statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014 Jul 22;130(4):350-79.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000061)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25047587?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
135. Edvardsen T, Asch FM, Davidson B, et al. Non-invasive imaging in coronary syndromes:
recommendations of the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging and the American Society
of Echocardiography, in collaboration with the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Society
of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance.
Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2022 Jan 24;23(2):e6-33.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
ehjcimaging/article/23/2/e6/6423983)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34751391?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
136. Nakano S, Kohsaka S, Chikamori T, et al. JCS 2022 guideline focused update on diagnosis and
treatment in patients with stable coronary artery disease. Circ J. 2022 Apr 25;86(5):882-915.  Full text
(https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/circj/86/5/86_CJ-21-1041/_html/-char/en)
137. Dibben G, Faulkner J, Oldridge N, et al. Exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation for coronary
heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021 Nov 6;(11):CD001800.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD001800.pub4/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34741536?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
138. McDonagh ST, Dalal H, Moore S, et al. Home-based versus centre-based cardiac rehabilitation.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2023 Oct 27;10(10):CD007130. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37888805?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
139. Thomas RJ, Beatty AL, Beckie TM, et al. Home-based cardiac rehabilitation: a scientific statement
from the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation, the American
Heart Association, and the American College of Cardiology. Circulation. 2019 Jul 2;140(1):e69-89. 
104 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 105 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000663)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31082266?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
140. Golbus JR, Lopez-Jimenez F, Barac A, et al. Digital technologies in cardiac rehabilitation: a science
advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023 Jul 4;148(1):95-107.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001150)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37272365?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
141. Paluch AE, Boyer WR, Franklin BA, et al. Resistance exercise training in individuals with and
without cardiovascular disease: 2023 update: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2024 Jan 16;149(3):e217-31.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001189)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38059362?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
142. Delgado-Lista J, Alcala-Diaz JF, Torres-Peña JD, et al. Long-term secondary prevention of
cardiovascular disease with a Mediterranean diet and a low-fat diet (CORDIOPREV): a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2022 May 14;399(10338):1876-85. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35525255?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
143. Hooper L, Martin N, Jimoh OF, et al. Reduction in saturated fat intake for cardiovascular
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Aug 21;8(8):CD011737.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD011737.pub3/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32827219?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
144. Abdelhamid AS, Brown TJ, Brainard JS, et al. Omega-3 fatty acids for the primary and secondary
prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Feb 29;3(3):CD003177. 
Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD003177.pub5/full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32114706?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
145. Khan SU, Lone AN, Khan MS, et al. Effect of omega-3 fatty acids on cardiovascular outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. EClinicalMedicine. 2021 Jul 8:38:100997.  Full text (https://
www.thelancet.com/journals/eclinm/article/PIIS2589-5370(21)00277-7/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34505026?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
146. Critchley JA, Capewell S. Mortality risk reduction associated with smoking cessation in patients
with coronary heart disease: a systematic review. JAMA. 2003 Jul 2;290(1):86-97. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12837716?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
147. IARC. IARC handbooks of cancer prevention: tobacco control. Volume 11: reversal of risk after
quitting smoking. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2007.  Full text (https://
publications.iarc.fr/Book-And-Report-Series/Iarc-Handbooks-Of-Cancer-Prevention/Tobacco-Control-
Reversal-Of-Risk-After-Quitting-Smoking-2007)
148. Wu AD, Lindson N, Hartmann-Boyce J, et al. Smoking cessation for secondary prevention of
cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022 Aug 8;8(8):CD014936.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD014936.pub2/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35938889?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
105
=== Page 106 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
149. Lichtman JH, Bigger JT Jr, Blumenthal JA, et al. Depression and coronary heart disease:
recommendations for screening, referral, and treatment: a science advisory from the American
Heart Association Prevention Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Nursing, Council on
Clinical Cardiology, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, and Interdisciplinary Council on
Quality of Care and Outcomes Research: endorsed by the American Psychiatric Association.
Circulation. 2008 Oct 21;118(17):1768-75.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.108.190769)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18824640?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
150. Tully PJ, Ang SY, Lee EJ, et al. Psychological and pharmacological interventions for depression in
patients with coronary artery disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021 Dec 15;12(12):CD008012. 
Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD008012.pub4/full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34910821?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
151. Kwong JC, Schwartz KL, Campitelli MA, et al. Acute myocardial infarction after laboratory-confirmed
influenza infection. N Engl J Med. 2018 Jan 25;378(4):345-53.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1702090)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29365305?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
152. Udell JA, Zawi R, Bhatt DL, et al. Association between influenza vaccination and cardiovascular
outcomes in high-risk patients: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 2013 Oct 23;310(16):1711-20.  Full text
(https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/1758749)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24150467?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
153. Clar C, Oseni Z, Flowers N, et al. Influenza vaccines for preventing cardiovascular disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2015 May 5;2015(5):CD005050.  Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/
cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD005050.pub3/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25940444?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
154. Yedlapati SH, Khan SU, Talluri S, et al. Effects of influenza vaccine on mortality and cardiovascular
outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Am Heart Assoc. 2021 Mar 16;10(6):e019636.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/JAHA.120.019636)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33719496?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
155. Barbetta LMDS, Correia ETO, Gismondi RAOC, et al. Influenza vaccination as prevention therapy
for stable coronary artery disease and acute coronary syndrome: a meta-analysis of randomized
trials. Am J Med. 2023 May;136(5):466-75. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36809811?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
156. Melgar M, Britton A, Roper LE, et al. Use of respiratory syncytial virus vaccines in older adults:
recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices - United States, 2023. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023 Jul 21;72(29):793-801.  Full text (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/72/
wr/mm7229a4.htm?s_cid=mm7229a4_w)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37471262?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
157. Baigent C, Blackwell L, Collins R, et al; Antithrombotic Trialists' (ATT) Collaboration. Aspirin in the
primary and secondary prevention of vascular disease: collaborative meta-analysis of individual
participant data from randomised trials. Lancet. 2009 May 30;373(9678):1849-60.  Full text (https://
106 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 107 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2809%2960503-1/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19482214?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
158. Yoo SGK, Chung GS, Bahendeka SK, et al. Aspirin for secondary prevention of cardiovascular
disease in 51 low-, middle-, and high-income countries. JAMA. 2023 Aug 22;330(8):715-24.  Full text
(https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2808523)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37606674?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
159. Antithrombotic Trialists' Collaboration. Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelet
therapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ. 2002
Jan 12;324(7329):71-86.  Full text (https://www.bmj.com/content/324/7329/71)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11786451?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
160. Serebruany VL, Steinhubl SR, Berger PB, et al. Analysis of risk of bleeding complications after
different doses of aspirin in 192,036 patients enrolled in 31 randomized controlled trials. Am J
Cardiol. 2005 May 15;95(10):1218-22. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15877994?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
161. Jones WS, Mulder H, Wruck LM, et al. Comparative effectiveness of aspirin dosing in cardiovascular
disease. N Engl J Med. 2021 May 27;384(21):1981-90.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/10.1056/NEJMoa2102137)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33999548?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
162. CAPRIE Steering Committee. A randomized, blinded trial of clopidogrel versus aspirin in
patients at risk of ischaemic events. Lancet. 1996 Nov 16;348(9038):1329-39. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8918275?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
163. Bhatt DL, Fox KA, Hacke W, et al; CHARISMA Investigators. Clopidogrel and aspirin versus aspirin
alone for the prevention of atherothrombotic events. N Engl J Med. 2006 Apr 20;354(16):1706-17.  Full
text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa060989)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16531616?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
164. Squizzato A, Bellesini M, Takeda A, et al. Clopidogrel plus aspirin versus aspirin alone for preventing
cardiovascular events. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Dec 14;(12):CD005158.  Full text
(https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD005158.pub4/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29240976?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
165. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration
of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery disease: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2016 Nov;152(5):1243-75. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27751237?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
166. Valgimigli M, Bueno H, Byrne RA, et al; ESC Scientific Document Group; ESC Committee for Practice
Guidelines (CPG); ESC National Cardiac Societies. 2017 ESC focused update on dual antiplatelet
therapy in coronary artery disease developed in collaboration with EACTS: The Task Force for
dual antiplatelet therapy in coronary artery disease of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)
and of the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Eur Heart J. 2018 Jan
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
107
=== Page 108 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
14;39(3):213-60.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/39/3/213/4095043)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28886622?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
167. Guo H, Ye Z, Huang R. Clinical outcomes of concomitant use of proton pump inhibitors and dual
antiplatelet therapy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Front Pharmacol. 2021;12:694698.  Full
text (https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/pharmacology/articles/10.3389/fphar.2021.694698/full)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34408652?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
168. Connolly SJ, Eikelboom JW, Bosch J, et al; COMPASS Investigators. Rivaroxaban with or
without aspirin in patients with stable coronary artery disease: an international, randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2018 Jan 20;391(10117):205-18. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29132879?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
169. Baigent C, Blackwell L, Emberson J, et al; Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaboration.
Efficacy and safety of more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: a meta-analysis of data from
170,000 participants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet. 2010 Nov 13;376(9753):1670-81.  Full text
(https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(10)61350-5/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21067804?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
170. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists' Collaboration. Efficacy and safety of statin therapy in older people:
a meta-analysis of individual participant data from 28 randomised controlled trials. Lancet.
2019 Feb 2;393(10170):407-15.  Full text (https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/
PIIS0140-6736(18)31942-1/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30712900?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
171. Newman CB, Preiss D, Tobert JA, et al. Statin safety and associated adverse events: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2019 Feb;39(2):e38-
e81.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/ATV.0000000000000073)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30580575?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
172. Hong SJ, Lee YJ, Lee SJ, et al. Treat-to-target or high-intensity statin in patients with coronary
artery disease: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2023 Apr 4;329(13):1078-87.  Full text (https://
jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2802214)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36877807?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
173. Writing Committee, Lloyd-Jones DM, Morris PB, et al. 2022 ACC expert consensus decision pathway
on the role of nonstatin therapies for LDL-cholesterol lowering in the management of atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight
Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Oct 4;80(14):1366-418.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0735109722055942?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36031461?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
174. Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Miller M, et al. Cardiovascular risk reduction with icosapent ethyl for
hypertriglyceridemia. N Engl J Med. 2019 Jan 3;380(1):11-22.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1812792)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30415628?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
175. Kernis SJ, Harjai KJ, Stone GW, et al. Does beta-blocker therapy improve clinical outcomes of
acute myocardial infarction after successful primary angioplasty? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004 May
108 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 109 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
19;43(10):1773-9.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/43/10/1773)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15145098?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
176. Tepper D. Frontiers in congestive heart failure: effect of metoprolol CR/XL in chronic heart failure:
Metoprolol CR/XL Randomised Intervention Trial in Congestive Heart Failure (MERIT-HF). Congest
Heart Fail. 1999 Jul-Aug;5(4):184-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12189311?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
177. Packer M, Bristow MR, Cohn JN, et al. The effect of carvedilol on morbidity and mortality in patients
with chronic heart failure. U.S. Carvedilol Heart Failure Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1996 May
23;334(21):1349-55.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199605233342101)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8614419?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
178. Leizorovicz A, Lechat P, Cucherat M, et al. Bisoprolol for the treatment of chronic heart failure:
a meta-analysis on individual data of two placebo-controlled studies - CIBIS and CIBIS II.
Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study. Am Heart J. 2002 Feb;143(2):301-7. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11835035?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
179. Bangalore S, Makani H, Radford M, et al. Clinical outcomes with β-blockers for myocardial infarction:
a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am J Med. 2014 Oct;127(10):939-53.  Full text (https://
www.amjmed.com/article/S0002-9343(14)00470-7/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24927909?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
180. Sorbets E, Steg PG, Young R, et al. β-blockers, calcium antagonists, and mortality in stable
coronary artery disease: an international cohort study. Eur Heart J. 2019 May 7;40(18):1399-407. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/40/18/1399/5263772)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30590529?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
181. Dondo TB, Hall M, West RM, et al. β-blockers and mortality after acute myocardial infarction in patients
without heart failure or ventricular dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 Jun 6;69(22):2710-20.  Full text
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109717369103?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28571635?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
182. Kim J, Kang D, Park H, et al. Long-term β-blocker therapy and clinical outcomes after acute
myocardial infarction in patients without heart failure: nationwide cohort study. Eur Heart J. 2020 Oct
1;41(37):3521-9.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/41/37/3521/5857797)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32542362?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
183. Safi S, Sethi NJ, Korang SK, et al. Beta-blockers in patients without heart failure after myocardial
infarction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021 Nov 5;11(11):CD012565.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD012565.pub2/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34739733?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
184. The Acute Infarction Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) Study Investigators. Effect of ramipril on mortality
and morbidity of survivors of acute myocardial infarction with clinical evidence of heart failure.
Lancet. 1993 Oct 2;342(8875):821-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8104270?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
109
=== Page 110 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
185. Pfeffer MA, Braunwald E, Moyé LA, et al; The SAVE Investigators. Effect of captopril on mortality
and morbidity in patients with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction - results of the
survival and ventricular enlargement trial. N Engl J Med. 1992 Sep 3;327(10):669-77.  Full text (https://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199209033271001)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/1386652?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
186. Køber L, Torp-Pedersen C, Carlsen JE, et al; Trandolapril Cardiac Evaluation (TRACE) Study Group.
A clinical trial of the angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor trandolapril in patients with left ventricular
dysfunction after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 1995 Dec 21;333(25):1670-6.  Full text (https://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199512213332503)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7477219?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
187. Yusuf S, Sleight P, Pogue J, et al; The Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators.
Effects of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-
risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2000 Jan 20;342(3):145-53.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJM200001203420301)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10639539?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
188. Fox KM; EURopean trial On reduction of cardiac events with Perindopril in stable coronary Artery
disease Investigators. Efficacy of perindopril in reduction of cardiovascular events among patients
with stable coronary artery disease: randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial
(the EUROPA study). Lancet. 2003 Sep 6;362(9386):782-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/13678872?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
189. Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular and
microvascular outcomes in people with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study and MICRO-
HOPE substudy. Lancet. 2000 Jan 22;355(9200):253-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10675071?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
190. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al; American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/
AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and
management of high blood pressure in adults. Hypertension. 2018 Jun;71(6):e13-115.  Full
text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/HYP.0000000000000065)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29133356?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
191. Williams B, Mancia G, Spiering W, et al. 2018 ESC/ESH guidelines for the management of arterial
hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2018 Sep 1;39(33):3021-104.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/39/33/3021/5079119)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30165516?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
192. Law MR, Morris JK, Wald NJ. Use of blood pressure lowering drugs in the prevention of cardiovascular
disease: meta-analysis of 147 randomised trials in the context of expectations from prospective
epidemiological studies. BMJ. 2009 May 19;338:b1665.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.b1665)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19454737?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
193. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al; EMPA-REG OUTCOME Investigators. Empagliflozin,
cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015 Nov
110 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 111 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
26;373(22):2117-28. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26378978?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
194. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al. Canagliflozin and cardiovascular and renal events in
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2017 Aug 17;377(7):644-57.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1611925)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28605608?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
195. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K, et al. Liraglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in
type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016 Jul 28;375(4):311-22.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1603827)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27295427?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
196. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, et al; SUSTAIN-6 Investigators. Semaglutide and cardiovascular
outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016 Nov 10;375(19):1834-44.  Full text
(https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1607141)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27633186?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
197. Gerstein HC, Colhoun HM, Dagenais GR, et al. Dulaglutide and cardiovascular outcomes
in type 2 diabetes (REWIND): a double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet.
2019 Jul 13;394(10193):121-30. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31189511?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
198. Davies MJ, Aroda VR, Collins BS, et al. Management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes, 2022.
A consensus report by the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the European Association
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care. 2022 Nov 1;45(11):2753-86.  Full text (https://
diabetesjournals.org/care/article/45/11/2753/147671/Management-of-Hyperglycemia-in-Type-2-
Diabetes)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36148880?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
199. Lincoff AM, Brown-Frandsen K, Colhoun HM, et al. Semaglutide and cardiovascular outcomes
in obesity without diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2023 Dec 14;389(24):2221-32. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37952131?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
200. Maruthur NM, Tseng E, Hutfless S, et al. Diabetes medications as monotherapy or metformin-
based combination therapy for type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern
Med. 2016 Jun 7;164(11):740-51. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27088241?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
201. Nathan DM, Cleary PA, Backlund JY, et al. Intensive diabetes treatment and cardiovascular
disease in patients with type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2005 Dec 22;353(25):2643-53.  Full text
(https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa052187)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16371630?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
202. Selvin E, Marinopoulos S, Berkenblit G, et al. Meta-analysis: glycosylated hemoglobin and
cardiovascular disease in diabetes mellitus. Ann Intern Med. 2004 Sep 21;141(6):421-31. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15381515?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
203. Patel A, MacMahon S, Chalmers J, et al; ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive blood
glucose control and vascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jun
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
111
=== Page 112 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
12;358(24):2560-72.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa0802987)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18539916?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
204. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, et al. Glucose control and vascular complications in veterans
with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jan 8;360(2):129-39.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa0808431)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19092145?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
205. Gerstein HC, Miller ME, Byington RP, et al; Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes
Study Group. Effects of intensive glucose lowering in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jun
12;358(24):2545-59.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa0802743)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18539917?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
206. Ray KK, Seshasai SR, Wijesuriya S, et al. Effect of intensive control of glucose on cardiovascular
outcomes and death in patients with diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
Lancet. 2009 May 23;373(9677):1765-72. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19465231?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
207. Boussageon R, Bejan-Angoulvant T, Saadatian-Elahi M, et al. Effect of intensive glucose lowering
treatment on all cause mortality, cardiovascular death, and microvascular events in type 2
diabetes: meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2011 Jul 26;343:d4169.  Full text
(https://www.bmj.com/content/343/bmj.d4169.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21791495?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
208. Hemmingsen B, Lund SS, Gluud C, et al. Intensive glycaemic control for patients with type 2 diabetes:
systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis of randomised clinical trials. BMJ.
2011 Nov 24;343:d6898.  Full text (https://www.bmj.com/content/343/bmj.d6898.long)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22115901?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
209. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, et al. 10-year follow-up of intensive glucose control in type
2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008 Oct 9;359(15):1577-89.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJMoa0806470)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18784090?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
210. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Stable angina: management. Aug 2016 [internet
publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg126)
211. Vandergoten P, Benit E, Dendale P. Prinzmetal's variant angina: three case reports and a review
of the literature. Acta Cardiol. 1999 Apr;54(2):71-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10378017?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
212. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary
artery revascularization: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2022 Jan 18;145(3):e18-e114.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001038)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34882435?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
213. Neumann FJ, Sousa-Uva M, Ahlsson A, et al. 2018 ESC/EACTS guidelines on myocardial
revascularization. Eur Heart J. 2019 Jan 7;40(2):87-165.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
112 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 113 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
eurheartj/advance-article/doi/10.1093/eurheartj/ehy394/5079120)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30165437?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
214. Patel MR, Calhoon JH, Dehmer GJ, et al. ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/SCAI/SCCT/STS 2017
Appropriate Use Criteria for coronary revascularization in patients with stable ischemic heart
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:2212-41.  Full text (http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0735109717303856)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28291663?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
215. Hueb W, Lopes N, Gersh BJ, et al. Ten-year follow-up survival of the Medicine, Angioplasty,
or Surgery Study (MASS II): a randomized controlled clinical trial of 3 therapeutic strategies
for multivessel coronary artery disease. Circulation. 2010 Sep 7;122(10):949-57.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/circulationaha.109.911669)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20733102?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
216. Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health-status outcomes with invasive or conservative care
in coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020 Apr 9;382(15):1408-19.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1916370)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32227753?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
217. Bangalore S, Maron DJ, Stone GW, et al. Routine revascularization versus initial medical
therapy for stable ischemic heart disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
trials. Circulation. 2020 Sep;142(9):841-57.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.120.048194)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32794407?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
218. Al-Lamee R, Thompson D, Dehbi HM, et al; ORBITA Investigators. Percutaneous coronary
intervention in stable angina (ORBITA): a double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2018 Jan 6;391(10115):31-40. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29103656?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
219. Boden WE, O'Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al; COURAGE Trial Research Group. Optimal medical therapy
with or without PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2007 Apr 12;356(15):1503-16.  Full
text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa070829)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17387127?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
220. Sedlis SP, Hartigan PM, Teo KK, et al; COURAGE Trial Investigators. Effect of PCI on
long-term survival in patients with stable ischemic heart disease. N Engl J Med. 2015 Nov
12;373(20):1937-46.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1505532)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26559572?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
221. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conservative strategy for stable
coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020 Apr 9;382(15):1395-407.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1915922)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32227755?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
222. Navarese EP, Lansky AJ, Kereiakes DJ, et al. Cardiac mortality in patients randomised to elective
coronary revascularisation plus medical therapy or medical therapy alone: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J. 2021 Dec 1;42(45):4638-51.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
113
=== Page 114 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
eurheartj/article/42/45/4638/6276780)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34002203?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
223. Varnauskas E. Twelve-year follow-up of survival in the randomized European Coronary Surgery Study.
N Engl J Med. 1988 Aug 11;319(6):332-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3260659?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
224. The VA Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery Cooperative Study Group. Eighteen-year follow-up in the
Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study of Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery for stable angina. Circulation.
1992 Jul;86(1):121-30.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1161/01.CIR.86.1.121)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1617765?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
225. Passamani E, Davis KB, Gillespie MJ, Killip T. A randomized trial of coronary artery bypass surgery.
Survival of patients with a low ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 1985 Jun 27;312(26):1665-71. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3873614?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
226. De Bruyne B, Fearon WF, Pijls NH, et al; FAME 2 Trial Investigators. Fractional flow reserve-guided
PCI for stable coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2014 Sep 25;371(13):1208-17.  Full text
(https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1408758)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25176289?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
227. Xaplanteris P, Fournier S, Pijls NHJ, et al. Five-year outcomes with PCI guided by fractional
flow reserve. N Engl J Med. 2018 Jul 19;379(3):250-9.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJMoa1803538)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29785878?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
228. Zimmermann FM, Omerovic E, Fournier S, et al. Fractional flow reserve-guided percutaneous
coronary intervention vs. medical therapy for patients with stable coronary lesions: meta-analysis of
individual patient data. Eur Heart J. 2019 Jan 7;40(2):180-6.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/40/2/180/5265290)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30596995?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
229. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management
of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Joint Committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2022 May 3;145(18):e895-1032. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001063)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35363499?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
230. McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment
of acute and chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2021 Sep 21;42(36):3599-726.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/36/3599/6358045)
231. Ridker PM, Manson JE, Gaziano JM, et al. Low-dose aspirin therapy for chronic stable angina. A
randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Ann Intern Med. 1991 May 15;114(10):835-9. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2014943?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
232. Antiplatelet Trialists' Collaboration. Collaborative overview of randomised trials of antiplatelet
therapy - I: Prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke by prolonged antiplatelet
therapy in various categories of patients. BMJ. 1994 Jan 8;308(6921):81-106.  Full text (https://
114 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 115 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
www.bmj.com/content/308/6921/81.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8298418?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
233. Parker JD, Parker JO. Nitrate therapy for stable angina pectoris. N Engl J Med. 1998 Feb
19;338(8):520-31. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9468470?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
234. Nidorf SM, Fiolet ATL, Mosterd A, et al. Colchicine in patients with chronic coronary disease. N Engl
J Med. 2020 Nov 5;383(19):1838-47.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa2021372)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32865380?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
235. Fiolet ATL, Opstal TSJ, Mosterd A, et al. Efficacy and safety of low-dose colchicine in patients with
coronary disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Eur Heart J. 2021
Jul 21;42(28):2765-75.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/28/2765/6188997)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33769515?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
236. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Nicorandil (Ikorel): now second-line treatment
for angina - risk of ulcer complications. Jan 2016 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.gov.uk/
drug-safety-update/nicorandil-ikorel-now-second-line-treatment-for-angina-risk-of-ulcer-complications)
237. Danchin N, Marzilli M, Parkhomenko A, et al. Efficacy comparison of trimetazidine with therapeutic
alternatives in stable angina pectoris: a network meta-analysis. Cardiology. 2011;120(2):59-72.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22122948?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
238. Ajabnoor A, Mukhtar A. Effect of trimetazidine on the functional capacity of ischemic heart
disease patients not suitable for revascularization: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
PLoS One. 2022 Feb 11;17(2):e0263932.  Full text (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?
id=10.1371/journal.pone.0263932)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35148340?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
239. Writing Committee, Lloyd-Jones DM, Morris PB, et al. 2022 ACC expert consensus decision pathway
on the role of nonstatin therapies for LDL-cholesterol lowering in the management of atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight
Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Oct 4;80(14):1366-1418.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0735109722055942?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36031461?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
240. Nissen SE, Lincoff AM, Brennan D, et al. Bempedoic acid and cardiovascular outcomes in statin-
intolerant patients. N Engl J Med. 2023 Apr 13;388(15):1353-64. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36876740?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
241. Nissen SE, Menon V, Nicholls SJ, et al. Bempedoic acid for primary prevention of cardiovascular
events in statin-intolerant patients. JAMA. 2023 Jul 11;330(2):131-40.  Full text (https://
jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2806646)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37354546?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
242. Nicholls SJ, Nelson AJ, Lincoff AM, et al. Impact of bempedoic acid on total cardiovascular events:
a prespecified analysis of the CLEAR outcomes randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2024 Mar
1;9(3):245-53. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38231501?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
115
=== Page 116 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
REFERENCES
243. Verheye S, Jolicoeur EM, Behan MW, et al. Efficacy of a device to narrow the coronary sinus
in refractory angina. N Engl J Med. 2015 Feb 5;372(6):519-27.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1402556)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25651246?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
244. Primary Panel:, Bainey KR, Marquis-Gravel G, et al. Canadian Cardiovascular Society/Canadian
Association of Interventional Cardiology 2023 focused update of the guidelines for the use of
antiplatelet therapy. Can J Cardiol. 2024 Feb;40(2):160-81.  Full text (https://onlinecjc.ca/article/
S0828-282X(23)01841-X/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38104631?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
245. Writing Committee, Birtcher KK, Allen LA, et al. 2022 ACC expert consensus decision pathway
for integrating atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and multimorbidity treatment: a framework
for pragmatic, patient-centered care: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution
Set Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 Jan 24;81(3):292-317.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2022.08.754)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36307329?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
246. Smith SC Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/ACCF secondary prevention and risk
reduction therapy for patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease: 2011
update. Circulation. 2011 Nov 29;124(22):2458-73.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/CIR.0b013e318235eb4d)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22052934?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
247. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention
of cardiovascular disease in women - 2011 update: a guideline from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2011 Mar 22;123(11):1243-62.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/CIR.0b013e31820faaf8)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21325087?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
248. Lyon AR, López-Fernández T, Couch LS, et al. 2022 ESC guidelines on cardio-oncology developed in
collaboration with the European Hematology Association (EHA), the European Society for Therapeutic
radiology and oncology (ESTRO) and the International Cardio-Oncology Society (IC-OS). Eur Heart
J. 2022;43(41):4229-361.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehac244)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36017568?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
249. Mesnier J, Ducrocq G, Danchin N, et al. International observational analysis of evolution and
outcomes of chronic stable angina: the multinational CLARIFY study. Circulation. 2021 Aug
17;144(7):512-23.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.054567)
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34261331?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
250. Ghisi GL, Abdallah F, Grace SL, et al. A systematic review of patient education in cardiac
patients: do they increase knowledge and promote health behavior change? Patient Educ
Couns. 2014 May;95(2):160-74. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24529720?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
251. Anderson L, Brown JP, Clark AM, et al. Patient education in the management of coronary
heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Jun 28;(6):CD008895.  Full text (https://
116 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 117 ===
Chronic coronary disease References
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD008895.pub3/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28658719?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
117
=== Page 118 ===
Chronic coronary disease Images
IMAGES
Images
Figure 1: ECG showing nonspecific ST depressions in V5 and V6, which may indicate ischemia. There are
nonspecific ST-segment changes in III and aVF
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
Figure 2: Normal ECG
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
118 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 119 ===
Chronic coronary disease Images
Figure 3: Pretest probabilities of obstructive coronary artery disease in symptomatic patients according to
age, sex, and nature of symptoms in pooled analysis
Juarez-Orozco et al. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019 Nov 1;20(11):1198-207; used with permission
Figure 4: Sensitivity and specificity of tests for anatomically significant coronary artery disease
Adapted from Knuuti et al. The performance of non-invasive tests to rule-in and rule-out significant coronary
artery stenosis in patients with stable angina: a meta-analysis focused on post-test disease probability.
Eur Heart J. 2018 Sep 14;39(35):3322-30; used with permission. (CCTA, coronary computed tomography
angiography; CI, confidence interval; CMR, stress cardiac magnetic resonance; PET, positron emission
tomography; SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography [exercise stress SPECT with or without
dipyridamole or adenosine]; Stress echo, exercise stress echocardiography)
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
119
=== Page 120 ===
Chronic coronary disease Images
IMAGES
Figure 5: Baseline exercise ECG in a 55-year-old man with a 1-month history of angina on exertion
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
Figure 6: Maximal exercise ECG in a 55-year-old man with a 1-month history of angina on exertion with ST
depressions in II, III, aVF diagnostic of ischemia, and normal ST changes in V4-6 (rapid upsloping)
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
120 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 121 ===
Chronic coronary disease Images
Figure 7: Computerized summary of exercise ECG in a 55-year-old man with a 1-month history of angina on
exertion
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
121
=== Page 122 ===
Chronic coronary disease Images
IMAGES
Figure 8: Angiogram (right anterior oblique caudal projection) in a 55-year-old man with a 1-month history of
angina on exertion. A 90% proximal stenosis of obtuse marginal 1 is present, explaining the patient's lateral
ischemia
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
122 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 123 ===
Chronic coronary disease Images
Figure 9: Angiogram (right anterior oblique cranial projection) in a 55-year-old man with a 1-month history of
angina on exertion. The image shows a 90% proximal stenosis of obtuse marginal 1 (explaining the patient's
lateral ischemia), 90% proximal stenosis of the first diagonal, and 99% subtotal occlusion of the second
diagonal (explaining the patient's anterior and anterolateral ischemia)
From the collection of Dr S.D. Fihn; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
123
=== Page 124 ===
Chronic coronary disease Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
124 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 125 ===
Chronic coronary disease Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Nov 11, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
125
=== Page 126 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Douglas Berger, MD, MLitt
General Medicine Service
Veterans Affairs (VA) Puget Sound Health Care System, Associate Professor, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA
DISCLOSURES: DB declares that he has no competing interests.
Stephan D. Fihn, MD, MPH
Professor of Medicine and Health Services
University of Washington, Seattle, WA
DISCLOSURES: SDF declares that he has no competing interests.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Douglas Berger and Dr Stephan D. Fihn would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Karen E. Segerson, Dr
Mark C. Zaros, Dr Joy Bucher, and Dr Steven M. Bradley, previous contributors to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: KES, MCZ, JB, and SMB declare that they have no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Syed Wamique Yusuf, MD, MRCPI, FACC
Associate Professor
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Cardiology, Houston, TX
DISCLOSURES: SWY declares that he has no competing interests.
John R. Charpie, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Pediatrics
Medical Director, Pediatric Cardiothoracic Intensive Care Unit, University of Michigan Congenital Heart
Center, C.S. Mott Children's Hospital, Ann Arbor, MI
DISCLOSURES: JRC declares that he has no competing interests.
Michael A. Spinelli, MD
Fellow
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY
DISCLOSURES: MAS declares that he has no competing interests.
Katherine Wu, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine
Division of Cardiology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
DISCLOSURES: KW declares that she has no competing interests.
Daniel Lenihan, MD
Professor of Cardiovascular Medicine
Director of Clinical Research, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
DISCLOSURES: DL declares that he has no competing interests.
=== Page 127 ===
Contributors:
Gianluca Rigatelli, MD, PhD, FACP, FACC, FESC, FSCAI
Director
Section of Transcatheter Treatment of Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult, Rovigo General Hospital,
Rovigo, Italy
DISCLOSURES: GR declares that he has no competing interests.
