# Congenital heart disease

=== Page 1 ===
Congenital
heart disease
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Aug 06, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Introduction  3
Contents  4
Epidemiology  4
Classification  4
Anatomic and anatomic-physiologic classification of congenital heart disease
 5
Ventricular septal defect (VSD)  5
Interatrial communications  8
Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)  13
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)  15
Partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection (PAPVC)  15
Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF)  16
Pulmonary valve atresia with a ventricular septal defect  18
Pulmonary atresia with an intact ventricular septum  18
d-Transposition of the great arteries (d-TGA)  18
Truncus arteriosus  19
Ebstein anomaly  20
Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC)  20
Tricuspid valve atresia  21
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS)  21
Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction  22
Aortic coarctation  22
Pulmonary valve stenosis  23
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and congenital heart disease  23
Online resources  25
Guidelines  
References  26
Images  32
Disclaimer  43
=== Page 3 ===
Congenital heart disease Overview
Introduction
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect, although still relatively rare.  [Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): facts about congenital heart defects] (https://www.cdc.gov/
ncbddd/heartdefects/facts.html)  Screening for fetal CHD includes ultrasonography in the second trimester of
pregnancy and postpartum clinical exam; however, detection rates are low.[1] [2] [3] Fetal echocardiography
is becoming the definitive test for diagnosis. The American Society of Echocardiography has produced
recommendations for when to refer for fetal imaging, although they acknowledge there are local differences
in referral indications depending on the population being screened.[4]
Early recognition of CHD is important because clinical presentation and deterioration may be sudden and
some treatable defects may even cause death before diagnosis.[1]
The surgical and medical treatment of CHD has markedly improved over the last 50 years. The first
successful open heart surgeries for intracardiac defects were carried out in the US in the 1950s.[5] [6] [7]
 It was the introduction of machines that perfused the vital organs while a surgeon carefully repaired a non-
beating heart that revolutionized the field of corrective surgery. Survival well into adulthood is now expected
for most babies born with CHD.[8]
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
Epidemiology
Worldwide, the prevalence of congenital heart disease (CHD) is estimated to be 0.8% to 1.2% of live
births.[9] In high-income North America, including the US, the birth prevalence of CHD is estimated to
be 12.3 per 1000 (95% CI, 10.9 to 13.8). An estimated 1% or a minimum of 40,000 infants per year are
expected to be affected by CHD each year in the US. Around, 25%, or 2.4 per 1000 live births, will undergo
invasive treatment in the first year of life. The most common type of congenital heart defect is bicuspid aortic
valve, which occurs in 13.7 of every 1000 people.[10]
Chromosomal abnormalities (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome, Down syndrome, or Turner syndrome) are found in
8% to 10% of individuals with CHDs and single-nucleotide or pathogenic copy number variants are found in
5% to 15%.[10]
Recent reports show a significant decrease in mortality among patients with CHDs. In 2020, there were 2817
deaths related to CHD in the US, an 11.9% decrease from 2010, and the age-adjusted death rate was 0.9
deaths per 100,000 people, an 18.2% decrease from 2010.[10] Due to the improved survival, there is now
an aging population of adults with CHD who present with complications related to acquired cardiovascular
disease (e.g., thromboembolic events and arrhythmias).[8][11] [12] The increased risk of morbidity and
mortality from premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) in this group, poses an increasing
challenge and highlights the need for long-term monitoring of patients and awareness of their ASCVD risk
factors.[8]
Classification
Left-to-right shunts
• Lesions that allow blood to shunt from the left side to the right side of the heart. They are associated
with varying degrees of increased pulmonary blood flow and are typically acyanotic. In some defects,
the site of the shunt may not be within the heart itself.
• Cyanosis occurs only if the lesions are large and are not repaired in childhood, and if the patient
develops pulmonary vascular obstructive disease (Eisenmenger physiology). Echocardiography is
the primary imaging modality, and, in the current era, the role of cardiac catheterization is primarily for
intervention.[13]
• Examples include:
◊ Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
◊ Atrial septal defect (ASD)
◊ Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)
◊ Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
◊ Partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection (PAPVC).
Right-to-left shunts
• Lesions that result in deoxygenated blood reaching the aorta and are associated with an increased or
decreased pulmonary blood flow.
• Examples include:
◊ Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF)
◊ Pulmonary valve atresia with or without a VSD
◊ d-Transposition of the great arteries (d-TGA)
◊ Truncus arteriosus
◊ Ebstein anomaly
◊ Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC)
◊ Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS).
Obstructive valvular and non-valvular lesions
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
• Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction
• Coarctation of the aorta
• Pulmonary valve stenosis (PS)
• Aortic valve stenosis (AS)
Anatomic and anatomic-physiologic classification
of congenital heart disease
Congenital heart defects can also be classified using the anatomic/physiologic (AP) classification introduced
by the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC) task force in their 2018
guidelines.[14]
In the AP system, a patient is classified with both an "A" class and "P'' class based on the “highest” relevant
anatomic or physiologic feature, and patients may move from one AP classification to another over time. If
clinical status worsens, the classification will change to a higher severity group, but improvement in status;
for example, after an intervention such as valve replacement or control of arrhythmia, can result in change to
a lower severity classification.
In the 2020 guidelines for the management of adults with congenital heart defects published by the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC), only the anatomic classification is used, without the physiologic component.[15]
 There are differences in the severity rating across both classification systems; for example, congenital
aortic valve stenosis and congenital mitral valve disease are considered mild defects in the ESC guidelines,
whereas the AHA/ACC guidelines grade them as moderate.
Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
VSD is the most common form of CHD, accounting for 20% of all cases, excluding bicuspid aortic valve
and mitral valve prolapse.[16] Subtypes based on location include: perimembranous (in the area of the
membranous septum); outlet (below 1 or both semilunar valves); inlet (inferior to the atrioventricular [AV]
valves); and muscular (in the muscular or trabeculated portion of the ventricular septum).[17]
CONTENTS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
Subtypes of ventricular septal defects: (A) outlet; (B) perimembranous; (C) inlet; (D) muscular
Mayo Clinic Foundation
Perimembranous defects typically occur as a solitary lesion and can sometimes close spontaneously by
apposition of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve to the defect. Outlet defects may be large and associated
with more complex forms of congenital heart disease such as tetralogy of Fallot. Both perimembranous and
outlet VSDs are in close proximity to the right cusp of the aortic valve. Because of the Venturi effect, these
defects can cause prolapse of an aortic valve cusp, which results in both a restriction to flow through the VSD
and regurgitation of the aortic valve.[18] Inlet defects do not close spontaneously and may be associated with
AVSD and AV valve regurgitation. Muscular defects are the most common type of VSDs in newborns and the
vast majority close spontaneously before 2 years of age. 
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
Apical 4-chamber echocardiographic image of a muscular VSD (arrow).
(RA) right atrium; (LA) left atrium; (RV) right ventricle; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
Children with a small VSD develop normally and are asymptomatic. With larger defects, the excess
pulmonary blood flow that ensues after the age of 6-8 weeks when the normal decrease in the pulmonary
blood flow occurs may lead to the developments of tachypnea, tachycardia, pallor, poor feeding, and poor
weight gain. Pulmonary vascular remodeling and obstructive disease usually do not develop in infants,
but can develop by 2 years of age. If left untreated, most moderate to large VSD eventually lead to severe
pulmonary hypertension and at some point reversal of the shunt occurs, leading to central cyanosis. This
condition, called Eisenmenger syndrome, does not typically occur until later in life. Once a patient develops
Eisenmenger physiology, closure of the VSD is contraindicated.[19] [20]
CONTENTS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
Patients have a low-to-mid frequency holosystolic murmur, a prominent precordial impulse, and, in patients
with pulmonary hypertension, a loud and single second heart sound. If the left-to-right shunt is large, patients
develop a mid-diastolic flow murmur ("rumble") across the mitral valve.
CXR and ECG can be normal in small VSDs. In larger defects, there is cardiac enlargement and increased
pulmonary vascular markings on CXR, and ECG reveals left ventricle hypertrophy; right ventricle
hypertrophy can occur with larger defects. Inlet-type VSDs are associated with left axis deviation on ECG.
Echocardiography provides important information regarding the anatomy of the defect, the volume of the
shunt, and right ventricular pressure.[21] [22]
CXR demonstrating pulmonary overcirculation
Mayo Clinic Foundation
The goal of treatment is to ensure adequate somatic growth and prevent pulmonary vascular obstructive
disease. In the absence of the development of pulmonary hypertension, VSDs typically lead to left ventricular
(LV) enlargement, which serves as an indication for closure. Small VSDs with restrictive flow may be left
untreated with need for continuous surveillance for the development of LV enlargement and endocarditis.
Large VSDs and defects associated with aortic regurgitation due to aortic valve cusp prolapse or excess
pulmonary blood flow may require diuretics and an increased caloric formula, followed by closure of the
defect (either surgical closure or transcatheter device closure). Those with increased pulmonary blood flow
and faltering growth are closed surgically between 1 and 4 months of age; most large defects are typically
closed by 6-9 months of age. For patients with Eisenmenger syndrome, pulmonary vasodilator therapy is the
treatment of choice, and women of childbearing age should be informed that pregnancy is not advised due to
high maternal mortality and fetal complications.[19] [20]
For more information see Ventricular septal defects .
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
Interatrial communications
Interatrial communications include atrial septal defects (ASDs) and other pre-tricuspid shunts (e.g., sinus
venosus defect and unroofed coronary sinus). Pre-tricuspid shunts are defined as the presence of a left-to-
right shunt that occur proximal to the right atrio-ventricular valve. As compared to post-tricuspid shunts (such
as ventricular septal defect and patent ductus arteriosus), these defects are characterized by low-pressure
shunting and varying degree of volume shunting. Pre-tricuspid shunts represent 6% to 10% of all CHDs and
have a female-to-male predominance of 2:1.[23] The main types consist of ostium secundum atrial septal
defect (60% to 70% of all pre-tricuspid shunts), which occur in the area of the fossa ovalis; ostium primum
defect, a form of atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD), in the inferior aspect of the atrial septum; superior and
inferior sinus venosus defects (in which the interatrial septum is intact), which are present at the site of the
entry of the superior and inferior vena cava, respectively, into the right atrium; unroofed coronary sinus, the
least common type.
Subtypes of atrial septal defects: (A) sinus venosus; (B) ostium
secundum; (C) ostium primum; (D) unroofed coronary sinus
Mayo Clinic Foundation
CONTENTS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
Apical 4-chamber echocardiographic image of an ostium primum
ASD (arrow). (RA) right atrium; (LA) left atrium; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
Unroofed coronary sinus is not a true atrial septal defect. It occurs when the roofing process of the coronary
sinus in fetal life is incomplete, thus allowing the coronary sinus and left atrium to communicate.
Children with isolated pre-tricuspid shunts are frequently asymptomatic.[24] It is the most commonly missed
CHD diagnosis in childhood, frequently not discovered until adulthood. Untreated defects of moderate to
large size lead to exercise intolerance, atrial arrhythmias, and increased pulmonary blood flow. An actual
increase in pulmonary vascular resistance is much more rare than in post-tricuspid shunts and occurs later in
life, more commonly in specific subpopulations such as those with Down syndrome. Paradoxical embolization
through the defect occurs almost exclusively in patients with an ASD secundum.
In patients with moderate to large defects, exam reveals an increased right ventricular impulse, a widely split
fixed second heart sound, and a soft systolic ejection murmur best heard at the upper left sternal border,
which is caused by increased blood flow through the pulmonary valve, rather than through the ASD. In large
defects, a diastolic murmur may also be present at the lower sternal border secondary to excessive blood
flow through the tricuspid valve.[24]
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CXR is not helpful in determining the subtype and may be normal with a small ASD. ECG may also be
normal in small secundum, sinus venous, and unroofed coronary sinus ASDs. With a larger shunt, there may
be right atrial enlargement, right ventricular hypertrophy, or right axis deviation.
Parasternal short axis echocardiographic image demonstrating right ventricular
enlargement in a patient with an ASD. (RV) right ventricle; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
CONTENTS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
Apical 4-chamber echocardiographic image demonstrating right ventricular enlargement
in a patient with an ASD. (RA) right atrium; (RV) right ventricle; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
Ostium primum-type defects are characterized by an initial counterclockwise frontal plane loop and left axis
deviation.[24]
Treatment involves either an operation or percutaneous device closure.[25]
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
Transesophageal echocardiographic image of an ASD occluder device
(arrow). (RA) right atrium; (LA) left atrium; (SVC) superior vena cava
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
Device closure is the preferred method for ostium secundum defects if the defect is of adequate size (the
largest closure device available is 40 mm in diameter) and if there are adequate septal rims to secure the
device.[26] In most other subtypes, device closure is not feasible due to lack of rims and proximity to other
cardiac structures, although recent reports suggest successful device closure of anatomically fit superior
sinus venosus defects.[27] Partial AVSD (ostium primum ASD and a cleft mitral valve) can be repaired after
the age of 18-24 months in most patients and involves closure of the mitral cleft in addition to the ASD.
For more information see Interatrial communications .
Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)
Represents 4% to 5% of all CHDs and is found in 40% of children with Down syndrome.[28] This defect
is also called endocardial cushion defect or atrioventricular (AV) canal defect. Endocardial cushions close
the ostium primum and form portions of the AV valves and the ventricular septum. AVSDs may be partial or
complete; 1 type of a partial AVSD is a primum atrial septal defect (ASD). A complete AVSD consists of a
primum ASD and a contiguous inlet ventricular septal defect (VSD). 
CONTENTS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
Apical 4-chamber echocardiographic image of complete AVSD. Note the ostium primum ASD (*) and the
contiguous inlet VSD (arrow). (RA) right atrium; (LA) left atrium; (RV) right ventricle; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
Presentation and findings on examination of patients with complete and partial AVSDs are similar to patients
with a VSD or ASD, respectively. Severity is also determined by the volume of the shunt, extent of the AV
valve abnormalities, associated cardiac and extracardiac anomalies, and the relative size of the 2 ventricles.
ECG is likely to reveal an initial counterclockwise frontal plane loop and a superior QRS axis.
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
12-lead ECG in an infant with complete AVSD; the ECG is significant for left axis deviation
Mayo Clinic Foundation
Patients with complete AVSDs usually have cardiomegaly and increased pulmonary vascular markings on
CXR.[29]
Children with a complete AVSD require surgical repair, usually performed at 3-6 months of age. They require
lifelong follow-up, as approximately 15% of patients develop progressive AV valve regurgitation or left
ventricle outflow tract obstruction.[14]
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
A ductus arterious normally closes within several days of birth and is an essential component of normal in
utero cardiovascular physiology. Persistent patency occurs in 1 in 2000 live births in full-term infants but is
much more common in preterm neonates.[30] In preterm infants, a PDA has been noted during admission
to the hospital in 42% of neonates weighing 500-999 g, 21% weighing 1000-1499 g, and 7% weighing
1500-1750 g.[31] There is also a 30-fold higher incidence in patients born at higher altitudes. PDA represents
9% to 12% of all CHDs.
Patients are asymptomatic when the ductus is small. With increasing size, newborns present with signs of
increased pulmonary blood flow, a wide pulse pressure and "bounding" pulses. Eisenmenger physiology,
secondary to elevated pulmonary vascular resistance and shunt reversal, may occur if the PDA is large
and long standing, and initially results in cyanosis only in the lower half of the body with gradual increase in
systemic mixing and cyanosis as the disease progresses.[20]
Typically, a PDA produces a continuous murmur, best heard at the left infraclavicular area. The murmur is
continuous because the aortic pressure is higher than the pulmonary artery pressure during both systole
and diastole. If the shunt is large, a diastolic mitral flow murmur also may be heard. In some preterm and
newborn infants, the murmur may be heard only in systole and can be confused with the murmur of a VSD.
ECG and CXR often are normal. In a large PDA, biventricular hypertrophy on the surface ECG, and
increased pulmonary blood flow and cardiomegaly on CXR may be present. Echocardiography allows
delineation of the PDA anatomy, and direction and volume of the shunt.[32] Further assessment of the
anatomy and proximity to other structures can be obtained with cross-sectional imaging such as a computed
tomography study.[22]
In preterm infants, the ductus can often be closed with indomethacin or ibuprofen, or failing that, ligated
surgically.[33] In older children and adults, in the absence of significant pulmonary arterial hypertension,
PDAs are closed percutaneously using coils or devices.[14] [26] Diuretics can be used to treat patients with
excess pulmonary blood flow until definitive closure.
For more information see Patent ductus arteriosus .
CONTENTS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
Partial anomalous pulmonary venous connection
(PAPVC)
An anomaly where ≥1 (but not all) pulmonary veins connect to the systemic veins or right atrium, instead
of to the left atrium. This defect represents <1% of all CHD. Anomalous connection of the right upper/
middle pulmonary vein(s) is associated with a sinus venosus defect; connection of the right lower pulmonary
vein(s) to the inferior vena cava may be part of an inferior sinus venosus defect, also referred to as "Scimitar
syndrome."[34]
Presentation, ECG, and CXR findings are similar to patients with ASDs, although patients with only one
abnormal vein are not infrequently clinically asymptomatic. The clinical presentation of patients with Scimitar
syndrome varies from relatively asymptomatic adults to severely ill infants with ipsilateral lung hypoplasia,
respiratory tract infections, and pulmonary hypertension.[35]
Transthoracic echocardiography may be insufficient to diagnose PAPVC accurately in adults, and other
imaging modalities such as transesophageal echocardiography, CT, or MRI may be necessary.
Surgical intervention is indicated if the shunt volume creates significant right-sided volume overload, which is
associated with a pulmonary outflow murmur and occasionally a diastolic tricuspid inflow murmur.[24]
Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF)
TOF is the most common cyanotic CHD, representing 4% to 8% of all defects, and can occur as a solitary
cardiac lesion, or as part of a genetic syndrome, the most common of which is DiGeorge syndrome (a
microdeletion of 22q11.2).[36] It consists of 4 abnormalities: outlet ventricular septal defect (VSD), right
ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) obstruction, an aorta that overrides the crest of the ventricular septum, and
RV hypertrophy, a result of RVOT obstruction. 
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
Parasternal long axis echocardiographic image in a patient with tetralogy of Fallot. The
aorta (Ao) overrides the VSD (*). (LA) left atrium; (RV) right ventricle; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
If RVOT obstruction is mild, mild or no right-to-left shunt occurs and there is no apparent cyanosis, a
physiologic setting sometimes referred to as "pink tetralogy." Most patients with TOF, however, have
progressive cyanosis after birth followed by dyspnea on exertion as a young child. Secondary erythrocytosis
develops as a compensatory mechanism for chronic hypoxemia. Poor somatic growth may be present.
Hypercyanotic or "tet spells" are hypoxic episodes consisting of an abrupt onset of rapid shallow breathing,
increased agitation, cyanosis, and a decrease in murmur intensity due to reduced blood flow through the
RVOT. Without treatment, these can cause profound hypoxemia, seizures, and death. Older children with
hypoxic spells will squat to increase systemic vascular resistance and thereby reduce hypoxemia.
A loud ejection systolic murmur is heard at the left upper sternal border with radiation to both axillae due
to the RVOT obstruction. Rarely, patients with minimal RVOT obstruction present with only mild cyanosis
and may develop signs of excess pulmonary blood flow due to a left-to-right shunt through the VSD. A right
ventricular impulse may be present.
Classically, CXR is normal except for decreased pulmonary vascular markings. Fewer than 25% of infants
have the classically described "boot-shaped" cardiac silhouette.
Severely hypoxic infants may be treated with prostaglandin E1 to re-open or maintain the patency of the
ductus arteriosus and increase pulmonary blood flow. If this does not improve the hypoxemia, the patient
may require a systemic-to-pulmonary artery graft, such as a modified Blalock-Taussig shunt, until definitive
repair (which includes patch closure of the VSD and relief of RVOT obstruction).[37] Complete repair may be
performed in certain centers in the newborn period, although most clinicians favor it at 3 months of age or
when progressive cyanosis develops. Surgical results have been excellent in recent decades, although many
CONTENTS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
patients repaired as young children require reimplantation of a competent pulmonary valve when older, which
can be performed either surgically or in a transcatheter procedure.[14]
Follow-up imaging is essential to identify timely need for valve replacement, type of treatment required, and
to monitor treatment outcome.[38] Ventricular arrhythmias are a potential life-risking long-term complication
of repaired TOF, with the likely etiology being slowly conducting anatomic isthmuses created at the
time of the original surgical repair. Treatment includes ablation with or without intracardiac cardioverter
defibrillator.[39]
For more information see Tetralogy of Fallot .
Pulmonary valve atresia with a ventricular septal
defect
This often is considered to be the most severe form of tetralogy of Fallot where the pulmonary valve does
not develop. Seventy per cent of patients have a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) that maintains pulmonary
blood flow. Others have multiple systemic-to-pulmonary collateral vessels. Pulmonary artery anomalies are
common and include hypoplasia, nonconfluence, and abnormal distribution.[40]
Patients are usually cyanotic at birth. A continuous murmur from the PDA or systemic-to-pulmonary artery
collaterals may be audible. The second heart sound is single. ECG shows right axis deviation and right
ventricular hypertrophy. CXR reveals markedly decreased pulmonary vascularity.
Prostaglandin E1 is commenced to maintain patency of the ductus arteriosus. Most patients are also likely
to require a systemic-to-pulmonary shunt to maintain adequate pulmonary blood flow. Patients with large,
confluent pulmonary arteries may have a single-stage repair; others require a staged repair. Patients with
multiple systemic-to-pulmonary artery collaterals are at risk of developing early pulmonary hypertension,
which initially can be segmental.[20]
Pulmonary atresia with an intact ventricular septum
This defect is rare and severity depends upon commonly associated right ventricular and tricuspid valve
hypoplasia. Coronary artery-to-right ventricle fistulae are also associated with this defect.[41] A large,
unrestrictive atrial septal defect (ASD) is required for survival as there is no outlet from the right ventricle to
the pulmonary arteries.
There are no exam findings characteristic of this defect. CXR reveals cardiomegaly with a prominent right
atrium and ECG shows atrial enlargement. Echocardiography is utilized to determine right ventricular size
and tricuspid valve hypoplasia.
A restrictive ASD is a medical emergency in these patients and requires an urgent balloon atrial septostomy.
Patients should be treated with prostaglandin E1 to maintain ductal patency because the patent ductus
arteriosus is the only source of pulmonary blood flow.[42] [43]
Most patients require staged operations that potentially allow the tricuspid valve and right ventricle to
increase in size. A modified Fontan operation or a 1.5 ventricle repair may be necessary if the right ventricle
and tricuspid valve do not reach an adequate size to allow a 2 ventricle repair. A 1.5 ventricle repair involves
a bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt (“Glenn” anastomosis) to divert superior vena caval blood flow to
the pulmonary arteries to reduce right ventricular preload, closure of the ASD, and establishment of right
ventricle-to-pulmonary artery continuity. Patients with coronary artery-to-right ventricle fistulae may require a
modified Fontan operation.
d-Transposition of the great arteries (d-TGA)
A common CHD representing 4% of all defects. In this defect, the aorta arises from the right ventricle and
the pulmonary artery arises from the left ventricle. As a result, deoxygenated systemic venous blood travels
from the right ventricle to the aorta without passing through the lungs, and pulmonary venous blood travels
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
from the left ventricle to the lungs via the pulmonary artery. The systemic and pulmonary circulations are in
parallel rather than series. This is not compatible with life without a communication between the 2 circuits,
such as a ventricular septal defect (VSD), atrial septal defect (ASD), or patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Most
patients with d-TGA do not have a VSD and a third of those with a VSD have associated pulmonary stenosis
(PS).
Patients present in the first few hours of birth with cyanosis as a medical emergency.
Exam reveals a prominent right ventricular impulse, a single loud second heart sound (due to the anterior
position of the aorta), and no murmur, or a systolic ejection murmur in those with a VSD and pulmonary
stenosis.
Prostaglandin E1 is used to maintain patency of the ductus arteriosus and most patients also require an
atrial septostomy to enhance mixing at the atrial level. The arterial switch operation, including coronary
artery button reimplantation is the best option for patients with d-TGA and a normal pulmonary valve, and
is performed in the first weeks of life. Once the pulmonary vascular resistance decreases, the left ventricle
is no longer conditioned to pump against the higher resistance associated with the systemic circulation.
TGA-VSD should be repaired in the newborn period if identified at that time. However, successful late repair
(1-2 months of age) has been reported, albeit with increased morbidity. Patients with the combination of
TGA, VSD, and PS may have undergone a Rastelli operation. This operation uses an angled VSD patch to
direct blood from the left ventricle (LV) across the VSD to the anterior aorta. This procedure also involves
placement of a conduit from the right ventricle (RV) to the pulmonary artery (PA). Although this operation
results in restoration of the LV as the systemic ventricle, long-term management often involves multiple
reoperations for replacement of the RV-to-PA conduit. Although no longer used, mainly older adults (>35-40
years of age) born with D-TGA have undergone the atrial switch procedure, either in the form of the Senning
or the Mustard operation.[38] The RV is the systemic ventricle after these procedures.[26] Around 80% of
these patients have had good outcome several decades after surgery. However, long-term complications,
including arrhythmias and conduction abnormalities, systemic or pulmonary venous baffle obstruction or
regurgitation, and systemic right ventricular dysfunction resulting in heart failure, occur in the vast majority
of adult patients.[14] Adults presenting with RV dysfunction post atrial switch procedures are candidates for
heart transplant.[26]
Truncus arteriosus
Comprises <1% of all CHD. It consists of a large outlet ventricular septal defect (VSD) and only 1 great
artery, the truncus, arising from the heart, which gives rise to the coronary arteries, the pulmonary arteries,
and the aorta. Four subtypes exist, based on the presence or absence of a main pulmonary artery, the
branching of the pulmonary arteries and the formation of the aorta.[44]
Subtypes of truncus arteriosus with ventricular septal defect (type A): Type A1: main pulmonary
artery is present and bifurcates into the left and right pulmonary arteries Type A2:right and left
branch pulmonary arteries arise from a common trunk. Type A3: One branch pulmonary artery
arises from the common trunk and the other is absent/arises from a PDA or the aorta. Type
A4: Truncus with aortic arch hypoplasia, coarctation or interrupted aortic arch and a large PDA
Calder L et al. Am Heart J 1976 Jul;92(1):23-38; used with permission
CONTENTS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
A microdeletion of 22q11.2 (DiGeorge syndrome), interrupted aortic arch, and truncal valve insufficiency are
common associated anomalies.
Patients present with congestive heart failure (CHF) or cyanosis.
Exam reveals a prominent right ventricle impulse and a systolic ejection murmur at the left sternal border.
There may also be a truncal valve ejection click. Truncal valve regurgitation results in a decrescendo diastolic
murmur. Interruption of the aorta and a restrictive PDA results in decreased femoral pulses.
Right ventricular dominance of infancy is seen on ECG, and CXR reveals cardiomegaly with increased
pulmonary markings. Transthoracic echocardiography helps accurately identify various aspects of this lesion.
[3] [45][46]
CHF is treatable with diuretics. Surgical repair entails closure of the VSD, separation of the pulmonary and
systemic circulations, and placement of a right ventricle-to-pulmonary artery conduit. Surgery is typically
performed by 2-3 months of age to prevent the development of pulmonary hypertension with elevated
pulmonary vascular resistance. Patients may also require multiple transcatheter interventions or reoperations
to treat dysfunction of the right ventricle-to-pulmonary conduit.[47] Operative mortality is greater with
associated anomalies, such as interruption of the aortic arch.
Ebstein anomaly
A rare malformation of the tricuspid valve in which abnormal delamination of the septal and posterior
valve leaflets leads to various degrees of tricuspid regurgitation, which can be severe at an early stage of
life.[48] [49] [50] As a result of the lack of delamination and depending on its severity, some part of the right
ventricle (RV) becomes “atrialized,” meaning that it lies below the level of the deformed tricuspid valve,
and does not contribute to the forward flow. In rare cases, left ventricular (LV) myopathy is also present.
In 80% to 94% of patients, a concomitant interatrial communication is present.[50] Cyanosis may occur
due to streaming of deoxygenated blood from the eccentric tricuspid valve regurgitation jet and through the
interatrial communication.
Patients have split first and second heart sounds. CXR reveals a markedly enlarged heart with a prominent
right-sided border and decreased pulmonary vascularity. ECG shows tall "p" waves in limb lead II and a right
bundle branch block pattern.[50] [51] Wolff Parkinson White syndrome is found in at least 15% of patients.
Echocardiography, both transthoracic and transesophageal assist in evaluating the valvular structural
abnormalities and atrialized RV.[3] Cardiac MRI is helpful in delineating the degree of RV atrialization, its
size, and its function.
There is a wide range of anatomic and physiologic severity. Patients with minimal cardiomegaly and tricuspid
regurgitation lead normal lives without needing surgery. Newborns with severe forms of Ebstein anomaly
require prostaglandin E1 to augment pulmonary blood flow until pulmonary vascular resistance falls,
and some do well without surgery. However, management may prove difficult in a subset of patients with
massive cardiomegaly. Severe tricuspid regurgitation is an indication for surgery, after careful hemodynamic
evaluation.[26]
Surgical interventions consist of tricuspid valve repair, replacement, or repair via Da Silva’s cone operation,
which is a more extensive surgery in which the tricuspid valve is repaired, the annulus is returned to its
anatomic location and excessive atrial tissue is resected. When performed by skilled operators, the results of
the cone operation in terms of valve function are excellent.[52]
Total anomalous pulmonary venous connection
(TAPVC)
Comprising <1% of all CHD, TAPVC occurs when all the pulmonary veins connect to the systemic venous
system or the right atrium. TAPVC can be subdivided into supracardiac, cardiac, infracardiac, and mixed
types, of which the supracardiac is the most common. TAPVC results in fully oxygenated blood from the
lungs being directed back to the right atrium, and survival requires a defect in the atrial septum, without
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
which blood cannot reach the aorta.[53] TAPVC can be complicated by obstruction of the veins that drain the
pulmonary venous confluence, resulting in pulmonary hypertension and congestion.
Patients with unobstructed pulmonary veins and a large intra-atrial communication have mild cyanosis and
increased pulmonary blood flow. Examination reveals a prominent right ventricle impulse and a systolic
ejection murmur. A CXR shows moderate cardiomegaly and increased pulmonary vascular markings. The
supracardiac form of TAPVC classically reveals a "snowman" configuration. Echocardiography can show a
dilated right atrium and right ventricle, and a posterior pulmonary venous confluence.[3]
Patients require surgery but have excellent long-term survival.
Patients with obstructed pulmonary venous blood flow present with respiratory distress secondary to
pulmonary edema. This is common in newborns who have an infracardiac connection, and patients require
emergency surgical repair.[53] Mortality is as high as 40%, despite prompt surgery.
Tricuspid valve atresia
Results in the absence of a direct communication between the right atrium and right ventricle. This anomaly
represents approximately 3% of all CHD. Initial survival is dependent on an intra-atrial communication.
Presentation and treatment depend on the relationship of the great arteries (normal or transposed), presence
of a ventricular septal defect (VSD), and severity of pulmonary valve stenosis.
Typically, patients present with cyanosis. The apical impulse may be prominent. The second heart sound
may be single or split. A systolic murmur may be due to a VSD or pulmonary stenosis, while a mid-diastolic
apical murmur may be due to increased pulmonary blood flow and congestive heart failure.
CXR reveals cardiomegaly with a prominent right atrial border. Pulmonary vascular markings vary
depending on the degree of pulmonary stenosis. ECG is characterized by left axis deviation and an initial
counterclockwise frontal plane loop. There may be left ventricle hypertrophy.
If the source of pulmonary blood flow is not reliable, the patient should be treated with prostaglandin
E1 until a systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt can be established. Those with transposed great arteries
have unrestricted pulmonary blood flow and require pulmonary artery banding to prevent pulmonary
vascular obstructive disease and/or pulmonary edema, along with anticongestive medications. All patients
ultimately undergo a Fontan operation in which the systemic venous return is connected directly to the
pulmonary arteries (total cavo-pulmonary connection).[38] Long-term survival exceeds 85% at 10-year
post-surgery follow-up. Long-term complications of the Fontan operation include conduction abnormalities,
arrhythmia, disorders of the lymphatics leading to plastic bronchitis and protein-losing enteropathy,
congestive hepatopathy with liver fibrosis and ultimate cirrhosis and failure of the Fontan circulation
warranting heart transplantation.
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS)
Refers to a spectrum of lesions that includes an intact ventricular septum with underdevelopment of the
left ventricle, and mitral and aortic valves. Patients commonly have coarctation of the aorta. Newborns can
appear normal for several days after birth but are dependent on a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Once the
ductus closes, they develop shock.
Examination reveals diminished lower extremity pulses and an increased right ventricular impulse.
Echocardiography is used for pre- and postoperative assessment, although visualizing the coronary artery
anatomy can be a challenge due to the commonly associated aortic hypoplasia.[46]
Untreated, HLHS is lethal, although mortality has been markedly reduced in the last decade. Patients require
a staged surgical approach.[54]
Stage 1 is a Norwood procedure, consisting of reconstruction of the aortic arch using the main pulmonary
artery and a modified Blalock-Taussig shunt supplying blood flow to the pulmonary artery branches.
Recently, placement of a right ventricle to pulmonary artery (Sano) shunt has been used as an alternative
to a Blalock-Taussig shunt during stage 1 palliation.[54] Stage 2 consists of replacing the modified Blalock-
CONTENTS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
Taussig shunt (or Sano shunt) with a bidirectional cavopulmonary (Glenn) anastomosis. Stage 3 consists
of completion of the cavopulmonary connection and formation of the Fontan circulation, as detailed in the
section on tricuspid atresia. In recent years, hybrid surgical/interventional catheterization procedures have
been utilized with branch pulmonary artery bands to restrict pulmonary blood flow, and stent deployment
to maintain ductal patency, although the utility of this approach remains unclear. Cardiac transplantation is
sometimes pursued as an alternative strategy to staged surgery.[55] Long-term complications of the Fontan
circulation are similar to those described in the section on tricuspid atresia, and there is some evidence that
in the presence of a systemic right ventricle these may occur at an earlier stage.
Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction
Includes 4 subtypes: aortic valve stenosis, supravalvular stenosis, discrete subvalvular stenosis, and tunnel
subaortic stenosis.
Aortic valve stenosis is the most common and represents 5% of all CHD.[56] The leaflets or cusps are
usually malformed or thickened. Approximately 2% of the general population has a bicuspid aortic valve,
but many of these individuals never develop clinically significant aortic valve stenosis or regurgitation.
Supravalvular stenosis occurs as an area of discrete or diffuse narrowing just distal to the sinotubular
junction in the ascending aorta. It is frequently associated with Williams syndrome or a defect in the elastin
gene on chromosome 7. Discrete subvalvular stenosis occurs when there is a fibromuscular ridge that
causes obstruction just below the aortic valve. Turbulence of blood flow can cause damage to the valve
leaflets of the aortic valve, resulting in progressive aortic regurgitation. Tunnel subaortic stenosis refers to a
longer stenotic segment of the outflow tract when compared to discrete subvalvular stenosis.
Presentation depends on the severity of the obstruction. Most patients are asymptomatic. Older patients
may present with chest pain or syncope. A subset of patients present with poor left ventricular function, low
cardiac output, and signs of shock and congestive heart failure ("critical" aortic stenosis).
Examination reveals a crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur, heard best at the left sternal border with
radiation to the upper right sternal border. Moderate or severe stenosis results in a palpable thrill and delayed
pulses. An ejection click may also be heard just after the first heart sound in patients with aortic valve
stenosis. The click does not vary with respiration, in contrast to a pulmonary valve ejection click. Patients
with concurrent aortic regurgitation also have a decrescendo diastolic murmur and a wide pulse pressure.
ECG inconsistently shows evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy. Severe LVOT stenosis is associated with
flattening or inversion of the T waves in leads V5 and V6.
CXR may reveal a prominent aorta as a result of poststenotic dilation. Echocardiography helps accurately
evaluate aortic valve morphology and estimate the pressure gradient across the LVOT. In valvular aortic
stenosis, the Doppler-estimated mean gradient is utilized to assess severity. The gradient will vary with the
cardiac output.
Patients with "critical" aortic stenosis require emergency relief of the stenosis. Symptomatic patients also
require relief of the obstruction, regardless of the degree of the stenosis. Infants with severe valvular stenosis
require balloon valvuloplasty, although surgery may be required for coexistent aortic regurgitation. Surgical
valvotomy or valve replacement is considered for older children and adults. Patients with severe stenosis
followed in the Second Natural History Study of Congenital Heart Defects had a 25-year survival rate of
81%.[57] Dilatation of the aorta, either at the level of the root or the ascending part, is present in 20% to
84% of patients with a bicuspid aortic valve, and in adult patients should be replaced when it reaches a
diameter of 5.5 cm, or 5 cm if an aortic valve surgery is needed, or the patient has an inherited thoracic aortic
aneurysm.[58]
Aortic coarctation
Constitutes 5% of CHD and is more common in males; aortic coarction is associated with Turner syndrome
in females. It consists of a posterior ledge of tissue that protrudes into the aorta and is typically described
as juxtaductal because it occurs across the ductus arteriosus. It is commonly associated with a bicuspid
aortic valve (70% to 75% of patients with aortic coarctation have a bicuspid aortic valve, yet only about 7% of
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
patients with bicuspid aortic valve also have aortic coarctation) and less commonly with a ventricular septal
defect or subvalvular aortic stenosis.[59]
Patients with mild obstruction may not present until adolescence with a heart murmur or systemic
hypertension. In those with severe obstruction, the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is the major source of
systemic blood flow distal to the obstruction, which means that neonates develop metabolic acidosis and
shock as the ductus closes.
The lower extremities have lower oxygen saturation and decreased pulses, in addition to congestive heart
failure in patients with severe obstruction. It is important to take the blood pressure in both upper extremities
and 1 leg before making the diagnosis as it is easy to miss the diagnosis in patients with a coarctation
proximal to the left subclavian artery or those with an anomalous origin of the right subclavian artery.
Turbulent blood flow through the area of coarctation produces a systolic murmur. Patients with an associated
bicuspid aortic valve have an ejection click.
Infants, paradoxically, have right ventricular hypertrophy on ECG and echocardiography because of the PDA
supplying the aorta distal to the obstruction. Older patients have signs of left ventricular hypertrophy. CT
and MRI may be useful in defining the anatomy of the coarctation in stent implantation. The most commonly
used surgical repair method is an extended end-to-end anastomosis, which when performed by skilled
operators, has excellent duration and long-term outcomes.[60] Other surgical techniques include subclavian
flap repair and use of a prosthetic graft. Repair in the newborn period is associated with an increased
incidence of recurrence, which is best treated by stent placement. Other long-term complications include
aneurysm formation at the site of the anastomosis and aortic dissection. Despite its localized nature, it is
well appreciated that aortic coarctation causes systemic endothelial dysfunction, and many patients are
at a risk of developing early-onset hypertension, which can lead to cardiovascular adverse events such as
stroke, peripheral arterial disease, and ischemic heart disease.[61] Up to 10% of patients develop intracranial
vascular microaneurysms (sometimes referred to as “berry aneurysms), especially in the anatomic area
of the circle of Willis.[62] Life-long follow-up, even in patients who do not have a residual obstruction, is
extremely important.
For more information see Aortic coarctation .
Pulmonary valve stenosis
Represents up to 8% of all CHD and is commonly found in patients with Noonan syndrome. Most children
present with an asymptomatic murmur. However, neonates with critical pulmonary valve stenosis present with
cyanosis secondary to a right-to-left shunting of blood at the atrial level.[63]
Examination reveals an increased right ventricular impulse, a click following the first heart sound that varies
with respiration, a normally split to a widely split second heart sound depending on the severity, and a
crescendo-decrescendo ejection murmur. With increasing severity of stenosis, the pulmonary ejection
click occurs earlier in systole; in the most severe cases, the click may merge with the first heart sound and
become inaudible.[49] Conversely, the second heart sound splits more widely with increasing severity of
stenosis and may become fixed in severe stenosis. In very severe stenosis, the pulmonary component of the
second sound may become difficult to hear due to the loud murmur that spills into diastole. A fourth heart
sound may be heard in patients with right ventricular failure.[49]
ECG may reveal right axis deviation and a CXR may show signs of right ventricular enlargement. Typically,
there is poststenotic dilation of the pulmonary arteries.
Balloon valvuloplasty is the preferred treatment, and at 10-year follow-up 84% of patients do not require
further intervention.[63] The long-term outcome is excellent. If valve replacement is ultimately needed, it can
be performed either surgically or via a transcatheter approach.
For more information see Pulmonary stenosis .
CONTENTS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Congenital heart disease Contents
CONTENTS
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and congenital
heart disease
People with CHD may be at increased risk for more severe COVID-19 infection, particularly those with more
severe anatomic and physiologic features of CHD.[64] [65] Simple biventricular defects, complex ventricular
defects, and heart surgery are associated with severe COVID-19.[66] Recommendations for prevention and
management of COVID-19 in adults with CHD, based on risk stratification, have been published.[65][67]
It is recommended that cardiac medications, including aspirin, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors, angiotensin-II receptor antagonists, beta-blockers, diuretics, and antiarrhythmic medications are
continued during COVID-19 illness, unless there is a clear contraindication.[64]
For more information see Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) .
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Congenital heart disease Online resources
Online resources
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): facts about congenital heart defects (external link)
(https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/heartdefects/facts.html)
ONLINE RESOURCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Congenital heart disease References
REFERENCES
Key articles
• Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC Guideline for the management of adults
with congenital heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019 Apr 2;139(14):e698-800. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000603)
• Baumgartner H, De Backer J, Babu-Narayan SV, et al. 2020 ESC Guidelines for the management
of adult congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2021 Feb 11;42(6):563-645.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/6/563/5898606)
• American College of Radiology. Appropriateness criteria: congenital or acquired heart disease. 2023
[internet publication].  Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3102389/Narrative)
• Toro-Salazar OH, Steinberger J, Thomas W, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients after coarctation
of the aorta repair. Am J Cardiol. 2002 Mar 1;89(5):541-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11867038?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. Wren C, Richmond S, Donaldson L. Presentation of congenital heart disease in infancy: implications
for routine examination. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 1999 Jan;80(1):F49-53.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1720871)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10325813?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Kardasevic M, Kardasevic A. The importance of heart murmur in the neonatal period and
justification of echocardiographic review. Med Arch. 2014 Aug;68(4):282-4.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4240565)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25568554?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Wasserman MA, Shea E, Cassidy C, et al. Recommendations for the adult cardiac sonographer
performing echocardiography to screen for critical congenital heart disease in the newborn: from the
American Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2021 Mar;34(3):207-22.  Full text
(https://onlinejase.com/article/S0894-7317(20)30779-3/fulltext)
4. Moon-Grady AJ, Donofrio MT, Gelehrter S, et al. Guidelines and recommendations for performance
of the fetal echocardiogram: an update from the American Society of Echocardiography.
J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2023 Jul;36(7):679-723.  Full text (https://onlinejase.com/article/
S0894-7317(23)00206-7/fulltext)
5. Allen HD, Driscoll DJ, Feltes TF, et al. Moss and Adams' heart disease in infants, children, and
adolescents. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;xxv-vi.
6. Meisner H. Milestones in surgery: 60 years of open heart surgery. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg.
2014 Dec;62(8):645-50.  Full text (https://www.thieme-connect.com/products/ejournals/
html/10.1055/s-0034-1384802)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25083834?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Cohn LH. Fifty years of open-heart surgery. Circulation. 2003 May 6;107(17):2168-70.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/01.CIR.0000071746.50876.E2)
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Congenital heart disease References
8. Brida M, De Rosa S, Legendre A, et al. Acquired cardiovascular disease in adults with congenital
heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2023 Nov 14;44(43):4533-48.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/44/43/4533/7284092)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37758198?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. GBD 2017 Congenital Heart Disease Collaborators. Global, regional, and national burden of
congenital heart disease, 1990-2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
2017. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2020 Mar;4(3):185-200.  Full text (https://www.thelancet.com/
journals/lanchi/article/PIIS2352-4642(19)30402-X/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31978374?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Tsao CW, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics-2023 update: a report
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023 Feb 21;147(8):e93-621.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001123)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36695182?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Chessa M, Brida M, Gatzoulis MA, et al. Emergency department management of patients with
adult congenital heart disease: a consensus paper from the ESC Working Group on Adult
Congenital Heart Disease, the European Society for Emergency Medicine (EUSEM), the European
Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS), and the Association for Acute Cardiovascular
Care (ACVC). Eur Heart J. 2021 Jul 8;42(26):2527-35.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/42/26/2527/6280168)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34021343?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Hart TB. Paraquat--a review of safety in agricultural and horticultural use. Hum Toxicol. 1987
Jan;6(1):13-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3546082?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Driscoll D. Fundamentals of pediatric cardiology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2006:73-88.
14. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC Guideline for the management of adults
with congenital heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019 Apr 2;139(14):e698-800. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000603)
15. Baumgartner H, De Backer J, Babu-Narayan SV, et al. 2020 ESC Guidelines for the management
of adult congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2021 Feb 11;42(6):563-645.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/6/563/5898606)
16. Nadas AS, Fyler DC. Pediatric cardiology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1972:348.
17. Lopez L, Houyel L, Colan SD, et al. Classification of ventricular septal defects for the eleventh iteration
of the international classification of diseases-striving for consensus: a report from the International
Society for Nomenclature of Paediatric and Congenital Heart Disease. Ann Thorac Surg. 2018
Nov;106(5):1578-89.  Full text (https://www.annalsthoracicsurgery.org/article/S0003-4975(18)31003-8/
fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30031844?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Eroğlu AG, Oztunç F, Saltik L, et al. Aortic valve prolapse and aortic regurgitation in patients
with ventricular septal defect. Pediatr Cardiol. 2003 Jan-Feb;24(1):36-9. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12360382?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Humbert M, Kovacs G, Hoeper MM, et al. 2022 ESC/ERS Guidelines for the diagnosis and
treatment of pulmonary hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2022 Oct 11;43(38):3618-731.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/38/3618/6673929)
20. Jone PN, Ivy DD, Hauck A, et al. Pulmonary hypertension in congenital heart disease: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Heart Fail. 2023 Jul;16(7):e00080.  Full
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Congenital heart disease References
REFERENCES
text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/HHF.0000000000000080)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37357777?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Budts W, Miller O, Babu-Narayan SV, et al. Imaging the adult with simple shunt lesions: position
paper from the EACVI and the ESC WG on ACHD. Endorsed by AEPC (Association for European
Paediatric and Congenital Cardiology). Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2021 May 10;22(6):e58-70. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/ehjcimaging/article/22/6/e58/6041760)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33338215?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Sachdeva R, Valente AM, Armstrong AK, et al. ACC/AHA/ASE/HRS/ISACHD/SCAI/SCCT/
SCMR/SOPE 2020 appropriate use criteria for multimodality imaging during the follow-up care of
patients with congenital heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution
Set Oversight Committee and Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Heart Association,
American Society of Echocardiography, Heart Rhythm Society, International Society for Adult
Congenital Heart Disease, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of
Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and Society
of Pediatric Echocardiography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020 Feb 18;75(6):657-703.  Full text (https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S073510971937812X)
23. Fyler DC. Atrial deptal defect decundum. Nadas' pediatric cardiology. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley &
Belfus; 1992:513-24.
24. Romfh A, Pluchinotta FR, Porayette P, et al. Congenital heart defects in adults : a field guide for
cardiologists. J Clin Exp Cardiolog. 2012 Jun 15;(suppl 8):007.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC3842121)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24294540?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Rigatelli G, Cardaioli P, Hijazi ZM. Contemporary clinical management of atrial septal defects in the
adult. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2007 Nov;5(6):1135-46. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18035929?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Marelli A, Beauchesne L, Colman J, et al. Canadian Cardiovascular Society 2022 guidelines
for cardiovascular interventions in adults with congenital heart disease. Can J Cardiol. 2022
Jul;38(7):862-96.  Full text (https://onlinecjc.ca/article/S0828-282X(22)00260-4/fulltext)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35460862?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Hansen JH, Duong P, Jivanji SGM, et al. Transcatheter correction of superior sinus venosus atrial
septal defects as an alternative to surgical treatment. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020 Mar 24;75(11):1266-78. 
Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109720302722)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32192652?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Fyler DC, Buckley LP, Hellenbrand WE. Endocardial cushion defect: report of the New England
Regional Infant Cardiac Program. J Pediatr. 1980;65:441-4.
29. Calkoen EE, Hazekamp MG, Blom NA, et al. Atrioventricular septal defect: from embryonic
development to long-term follow-up. Int J Cardiol. 2016 Jan 1;202:784-95. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26476030?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Dice JE, Bhatia J. Patent ductus arteriosus: an overview. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther. 2007
Jul;12(3):138-46.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3462096)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23055849?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Peterec SM, Warshaw JB. The premature newborn. In: McMillan JA, Feigin RD, et al, eds. Oski's
pediatrics principles & practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006:226.
32. Hamrick SEG, Sallmon H, Rose AT, et al. Patent ductus arteriosus of the preterm infant.
Pediatrics. 2020 Nov;146(5):e20201209.  Full text (https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Congenital heart disease References
article/146/5/e20201209/75323/Patent-Ductus-Arteriosus-of-the-Preterm-Infant)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33093140?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Aranda JV, Clyman R, Cox B, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial on intravenous
ibuprofen L-lysine for the early closure of nonsymptomatic patent ductus arteriosus within 72 hours
of birth in extremely low-birth-weight infants. Am J Perinatol. 2009 Mar;26(3):235-45. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19067286?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Neill CA, Ferencz C, Sabiston DC, et al. The familial occurrence of hypoplastic right lung with
systemic arterial supply and venous drainage: "Scimitar syndrome." Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp. 1960
Jul;107:1-21. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14426379?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Vida VL, Padalino MA, Boccuzzo G, et al. Scimitar syndrome: a European Congenital Heart
Surgeons Association (ECHSA) multicentric study. Circulation. 2010 Sep 21;122(12):1159-66.  Full
text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.926204)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20823387?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. Bailliard F, Anderson RH. Tetralogy of fallot. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Jan 13;4:2.  Full text (https://
ojrd.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1750-1172-4-2)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19144126?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Fraser CD, McKenzie ED, Cooley DA. Tetralogy of Fallot: surgical management individualized to
the patient. Ann Thorac Surg. 2001 May;71(5):1556-61. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11383800?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. American College of Radiology. Appropriateness criteria: congenital or acquired heart disease. 2023
[internet publication].  Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3102389/Narrative)
39. Krieger EV, Zeppenfeld K, DeWitt ES, et al. Arrhythmias in repaired tetralogy of fallot: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2022
Nov;15(11):e000084.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/HAE.0000000000000084)
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36263773?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Liao PK, Edwards WD, Julsrud PR, et al. Pulmonary blood supply in patients with pulmonary
atresia and ventricular septal defect. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1985 Dec;6(6):1343-50.  Full text (https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109785802230?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4067114?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Kasznica J, Ursell PC, Blanc WA, et al. Abnormalities of the coronary circulation in pulmonary
atresia and intact ventricular septum. Am Heart J. 1987 Dec;114(6):1415-20. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3687696?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Akkinapally S, Hundalani SG, Kulkarni M, et al. Prostaglandin E1 for maintaining ductal
patency in neonates with ductal-dependent cardiac lesions. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2018 Feb 27;2(2):CD011417.  Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/
doi/10.1002/14651858.CD011417.pub2/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29486048?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Schneider AW, Blom NA, Bruggemans EF, et al. More than 25 years of experience in managing
pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014 Nov;98(5):1680-6.  Full
text (https://www.annalsthoracicsurgery.org/article/S0003-4975(14)01287-9/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25149048?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Calder L, Van Praagh R, Van Praagh S, et al. Truncus arteriosus communis. Clinical,
angiocardiographic, and pathologic findings in 100 patients. Am Heart J. 1976 Jul;92(1):23-38.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/985630?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Congenital heart disease References
REFERENCES
45. Chikkabyrappa S, Mahadevaiah G, Buddhe S, et al. Common arterial trunk: physiology, imaging,
and management. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth. 2019 Jun;23(2):225-36. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30596352?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Frommelt P, Lopez L, Dimas VV, et al. Recommendations for multimodality assessment of congenital
coronary anomalies: a guide from the American Society of Echocardiography: developed in
collaboration with the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Japanese Society
of Echocardiography, and Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. J Am Soc Echocardiogr.
2020 Mar;33(3):259-94.  Full text (https://onlinejase.com/article/S0894-7317(19)31083-1/fulltext)
47. Khambadkone S, Coats L, Taylor A, et al. Percutaneous pulmonary valve implantation in
humans: results in 59 consecutive patients. Circulation. 2005 Aug 23;112(8):1189-97.  Full text
(http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/112/8/1189.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16103239?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. New England Regional Infant Cardiac Program. Report of the New England Regional Infant
Cardiac Program. Pediatrics. 1980 Feb;65(2 Pt 2):375-461. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7355042?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Bruce CJ, Connolly HM. Right-sided valve disease deserves a little more respect. Circulation.
2009 May 26;119(20):2726-34.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.108.776021)
50. Attenhofer Jost CH, Connolly HM, Dearani JA, et al. Ebstein's anomaly. Circulation. 2007 Jan
16;115(2):277-85.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.619338)
51. Schiebler GL, Adams P, Anderson RC, et al. Clinical study of twenty-three cases of Ebstein's anomaly
of the tricuspid valve. Circulation. 1959 Feb;19(2):165-87.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/
content/circulationaha/19/2/165.full.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13629777?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Lange R, Burri M, Eschenbach LK, et al. Da Silva's cone repair for Ebstein's anomaly: effect on right
ventricular size and function. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2015 Aug;48(2):316-20.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/ejcts/article/48/2/316/446510/Da-Silva-s-cone-repair-for-Ebstein-s-anomaly)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25535206?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Geva T, Van Praagh S. Anomalies of the pulmonary veins. In: Allen HD, Driscoll DJ, Feltes TF, et
al. Moss and Adams' heart disease in infants, children, and adolescents. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2008:775-6.
54. Ohye RG, Sleeper LA, Mahony L, et al; Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Comparison of
shunt types in the Norwood procedure for single-ventricle lesions. N Engl J Med. 2010 May
27;362(21):1980-92.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2891109)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20505177?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Merrill WH, Frist WH, Stewart JR, et al. Heart transplantation in children. Ann Surg. 1991
May;213(5):393-8.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1358457)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2025059?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Mitchell SC, Korones SB, Berendes HW. Congenital heart disease in 56,109 births: incidence
and natural history. Circulation. 1971 Mar;43(3):323-32. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/5102136?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Keane JF, Driscoll DJ, Gersony WM, et al. Second natural history study of congenital heart defects:
results of treatment of patients with aortic valvar stenosis. Circulation. 1993 Feb;87(2 suppl):I16-27.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8425319?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Congenital heart disease References
58. Isselbacher EM, Preventza O, Hamilton Black J 3rd, et al. 2022 ACC/AHA guideline for the
diagnosis and management of aortic disease: a report of the American Heart Association/American
College of Cardiology Joint Committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2022 Dec
13;146(24):e334-482.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001106)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36322642?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Sinning C, Zengin E, Kozlik-Feldmann R, et al. Bicuspid aortic valve and aortic coarctation in
congenital heart disease-important aspects for treatment with focus on aortic vasculopathy.
Cardiovasc Diagn Ther. 2018 Dec;8(6):780-8.  Full text (https://cdt.amegroups.org/
article/view/21779/22183)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30740325?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Vasile CM, Laforest G, Bulescu C, et al. From crafoord's end-to-end anastomosis approach to
percutaneous interventions: coarctation of the aorta management strategies and reinterventions. J Clin
Med. 2023 Nov 27;12(23):7350.  Full text (https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/12/23/7350)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38068402?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Toro-Salazar OH, Steinberger J, Thomas W, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients after coarctation
of the aorta repair. Am J Cardiol. 2002 Mar 1;89(5):541-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11867038?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Natraj Setty HSS, Shivanand P, Narendhiran P, et al. Coarctation of aorta presenting as spontaneous
subarachnoid hemorrhage in a young female: a case report of a rare clinical entity. Cardiol Res. 2019
Aug;10(4):241-4.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6681846)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31413782?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Cuypers JA, Witsenburg M, van der Linde D, et al. Pulmonary stenosis: update on diagnosis and
therapeutic options. Heart. 2013 Mar;99(5):339-47.
64. Alsaied T, Aboulhosn JA, Cotts TB, et al. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic
implications in pediatric and adult congenital heart disease. J Am Heart Assoc. 2020 Jun
16;9(12):e017224.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/abs/10.1161/JAHA.120.017224)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32441586?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
65. Diller GP, Gatzoulis MA, Broberg CS, et al. Coronavirus disease 2019 in adults with congenital heart
disease: a position paper from the ESC working group of adult congenital heart disease, and the
International Society for Adult Congenital Heart Disease. Eur Heart J. 2021 May 14;42(19):1858-65. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/19/1858/6031689)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33313664?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Ehwerhemuepha L, Roth B, Patel AK, et al. Association of congenital and acquired cardiovascular
conditions with COVID-19 severity among pediatric patients in the US. JAMA Netw Open. 2022 May
2;5(5):e2211967.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2792374)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35579899?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Radke RM, Frenzel T, Baumgartner H, et al. Adult congenital heart disease and the
COVID-19 pandemic. Heart. 2020 Sep;106(17):1302-9.  Full text (https://heart.bmj.com/
content/106/17/1302.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32522822?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
IMAGES
Images
Figure 1: Subtypes of ventricular septal defects: (A) outlet; (B) perimembranous; (C) inlet; (D) muscular
Mayo Clinic Foundation
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
Figure 2: Apical 4-chamber echocardiographic image of a muscular VSD (arrow). (RA) right atrium; (LA) left
atrium; (RV) right ventricle; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
IMAGES
Figure 3: CXR demonstrating pulmonary overcirculation
Mayo Clinic Foundation
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
Figure 4: Subtypes of atrial septal defects: (A) sinus venosus; (B) ostium secundum; (C) ostium primum; (D)
unroofed coronary sinus
Mayo Clinic Foundation
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
IMAGES
Figure 5: Apical 4-chamber echocardiographic image of an ostium primum ASD (arrow). (RA) right atrium;
(LA) left atrium; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
Figure 6: Parasternal short axis echocardiographic image demonstrating right ventricular enlargement in a
patient with an ASD. (RV) right ventricle; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
IMAGES
Figure 7: Apical 4-chamber echocardiographic image demonstrating right ventricular enlargement in a patient
with an ASD. (RA) right atrium; (RV) right ventricle; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
Figure 8: Transesophageal echocardiographic image of an ASD occluder device (arrow). (RA) right atrium;
(LA) left atrium; (SVC) superior vena cava
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
IMAGES
Figure 9: Apical 4-chamber echocardiographic image of complete AVSD. Note the ostium primum ASD (*)
and the contiguous inlet VSD (arrow). (RA) right atrium; (LA) left atrium; (RV) right ventricle; (LV) left ventricle
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
Figure 10: 12-lead ECG in an infant with complete AVSD; the ECG is significant for left axis deviation
Mayo Clinic Foundation
Figure 11: Parasternal long axis echocardiographic image in a patient with tetralogy of Fallot. The aorta (Ao)
overrides the VSD (*). (LA) left atrium; (RV) right ventricle; (LV) left ventricle
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Congenital heart disease Images
IMAGES
Image courtesy of Patrick W. O'Leary, MD
Figure 12: Subtypes of truncus arteriosus with ventricular septal defect (type A): Type A1: main pulmonary
artery is present and bifurcates into the left and right pulmonary arteries Type A2:right and left branch
pulmonary arteries arise from a common trunk. Type A3: One branch pulmonary artery arises from the
common trunk and the other is absent/arises from a PDA or the aorta. Type A4: Truncus with aortic arch
hypoplasia, coarctation or interrupted aortic arch and a large PDA
Calder L et al. Am Heart J 1976 Jul;92(1):23-38; used with permission
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Congenital heart disease Disclaimer
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Congenital heart disease Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Aug 06, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Karen K. Stout, MD, FACC
Professor of Medicine
Adjunct Professor of Pediatrics and Cardiology, Division of Cardiology, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA
DISCLOSURES: KKS is an author of a guideline cited in this topic.
Yonatan Buber, MD
Associate Professor of Medicine
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
DISCLOSURES: YB declares that he has no competing interests.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Karen S. Stout and Dr Yonatan Buber would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Sachin Khambadkone, Dr
Nathaniel W. Taggart, and Dr Frank Cetta, the previous contributors to this topic. SK, NWT, and FC declare
that they have no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Tain-Yen Hsia, MD
Attending Pediatric Cardiothoracic Surgeon
Medical University of South Carolina Children's Hospital, Charleston, SC
DISCLOSURES: TYH declares that he has no competing interests.
