# Evaluation of hypertension

=== Page 1 ===
Evaluation of
hypertension
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Dec 10, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Theory  6
Etiology  6
Emergencies  9
Urgent considerations  9
Diagnosis  11
Approach  11
Differentials overview  18
Differentials  20
Online resources  32
References  33
Images  42
Disclaimer  43
=== Page 3 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Overview
Summary
Hypertension is a common disorder that affects a large proportion of the community. It is usually
asymptomatic and is detected on routine exam or after the occurrence of a complication such as a heart
attack or stroke.[1]
The 2017 ACC/AHA guidelines for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood
pressure in adults defines hypertension as any systolic blood pressure measurement of ≥130 mmHg or any
diastolic blood pressure measurement of ≥80 mmHg.[2] ACC/AHA blood pressure categories are defined as
follows:
• Elevated blood pressure: systolic blood pressure of 120-129 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure of
<80 mmHg
• Stage 1 hypertension: systolic blood pressure of 130-139 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure of
80-89 mmHg
• Stage 2 hypertension: systolic blood pressure of ≥140 mmHg and/or diastolic blood pressure of ≥90
mmHg.
The 2017 ACC/AHA guidelines definition represents a more aggressive approach to diagnosis and treatment
of hypertension compared with Joint National Committee (JNC) 7 and JNC 8 recommendations, where blood
pressure in the range of 120-139 mmHg/80-89 mmHg is considered prehypertension and blood pressure
>140/90 mmHg is considered elevated.[3] [4]
Publication of the 2017 ACC/AHA guidelines has prompted widespread debate, and there are calls for
the recommendations to be revisited. Implementing the guidelines would increase the prevalence of
hypertension by 26.8% in the US. Critics are concerned that labelling more patients as hypertensive
could increase psychological morbidity, as well as exposing lower-risk patients to the potential harm of
antihypertensive medications.[5]
The 2017 ACC/AHA guidelines were mainly based on the results of the SPRINT trial, which investigated
intensive or standard hypertension treatment in people with a systolic blood pressure of ≥130 mmHg with an
increased cardiovascular risk (but without diabetes).[6] Listen to our podcast for more on the controversy. 
[BMJ Best Practice Podcast: hypertension] (https://soundcloud.com/bmjpodcasts/bmj-best-practice-
hypertension-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-new-2017-ahaacc-guidelines)
European guideline blood pressure categories are defined as follows:[7]
• Elevated blood pressure: office systolic blood pressure 120-139 mmHg or office diastolic blood
pressure 70-89 mmHg
• Hypertension: office systolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg or office diastolic blood pressure ≥90 mmHg.
For the diagnosis of elevated blood pressure or hypertension to be made, the European guidelines
recommend confirmation with out-of-office measurements or at least one repeat office measurement at a
subsequent visit.[7] Isolated systolic hypertension is defined as a systolic blood pressure ≥140 mmHg, with a
diastolic blood pressure <90 mmHg.[7]
The UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence states that a diagnosis of hypertension is confirmed
in those with:[8]
• a clinic blood pressure of ≥140/90 mmHg, and
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Overview
OVERVIEW
• daytime ambulatory blood pressure monitoring average or home blood pressure monitoring average of
≥135/85 mmHg.
Although different studies have used a variety of cut-off points for the diagnosis of hypertension in the
community, any blood pressure >120 mmHg systolic is associated with an increased cardiovascular risk.
The importance of hypertension is its relation to other cardiovascular risk factors and consequent overall
cardiovascular risk.
The AHA defines resistant hypertension as:[9]
• Clinic blood pressure >130/80 mmHg despite the concurrent use of at least 3 antihypertensive agents
(including an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin receptor antagonist, a long-acting calcium channel blocker,
and a diuretic) at maximum or maximally tolerated doses.
• Patients who require 4 or more antihypertensive agents to achieve their target blood pressure are
also considered to have resistant hypertension. The diagnosis requires the exclusion of white-coat
hypertension and poor adherence with antihypertensive medication.
This topic addresses the evaluation of hypertension in adults.
Epidemiology
According to a global analysis of trends in hypertension, the number of adults ages 30-79 years with
hypertension increased from 650 million to 1.28 billion in the period 1990-2019.[10] Based on National
Health and Nutrition Survey (NHANES) data from 2017-2020, an estimated 122.4 million US adults ages
≥20 years have hypertension (defined as self-reported use of antihypertensive medication, systolic BP
≥130 mmHg or diastolic BP ≥80 mmHg).[11] During this period, the prevalence of hypertension was 28.5%
among those ages 20-44 years, 58.6% among those ages 45-64 years, and 76.5% among those ages ≥65
years.[11] The prevalence may be similar or higher in Western Europe.[12] [13] 
In 2010, the estimated global age-standardized prevalence of hypertension in adults ages ≥20 years was
31.1%; 28.5% in high-income countries and 31.5% in low- and middle-income countries.[14]
Prevalence by sex has been found to differ with age with prevalence higher in men than in women ages <65
years, but higher in women than in men ages ≥65 years.[11] [14]
Hypertension is more prevalent in black people than in white people, starting in childhood, with 76% of black
men and women developing hypertension by age 55 years, compared with 55% and 40% of white men and
women, respectively.[15]
The exact prevalence of hypertension is difficult to assess, as it is usually asymptomatic. Prevalence is
expected to rise as the "cut-off" value for hypertension is redefined at a lower level.
Approximately 15% of patients with hypertension have resistant hypertension.[9]
Complications and hypertension-mediated organ damage
Studies have shown that treatment of hypertension can reduce the incidence of future cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular events.[16] [17] The aim of early diagnosis and treatment of hypertension is to lower overall
cardiovascular risk and prevent cerebrovascular events.
The effects of chronic hypertension on organ systems are referred to as hypertension-mediated organ
damage.
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Overview
Left ventricular hypertrophy, cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, hypertensive retinopathy, and
nephropathy are the most common manifestations.[18] The presence of left ventricular hypertrophy is a poor
prognostic sign, and regression of left ventricular hypertrophy improves prognosis.[19] Patients with resistant
hypertension are at higher risk of experiencing cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events and developing
chronic kidney disease.[9]
Cardiovascular risk
Guidelines on the management of hypertension emphasize the importance of calculating and managing
the overall cardiovascular risk of a patient, rather than focusing only on blood pressure readings. The ACC
and AHA have published an online tool to calculate patients’ 10-year and lifetime risk of atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease.  [ACC: ASCVD Risk Estimator Plus] (http://tools.acc.org/ASCVD-Risk-Estimator-
Plus/#!/calculate/estimate)
For individuals ages 40-70 years, each increment of 20 mmHg in systolic blood pressure or 10 mmHg in
diastolic blood pressure across the entire blood pressure range from 115/75 to 185/115 mmHg doubles
the risk of cardiovascular disease.[20] The European Society for Cardiology has proposed that sex-specific
thresholds may be appropriate as lower blood pressure levels are associated with an increased risk of
cardiovascular disease in women.[21] Treating associated cardiovascular risk factors such as obesity,
diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, and smoking are as important as managing hypertension in lowering overall
cardiovascular risk.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Theory
THEORY
Etiology
Primary hypertension
This is the most common situation, when no underlying cause can be found to account for elevated blood
pressure. It is also referred to as essential hypertension. A genetic basis has been suggested.[22] Lifestyle
influences such as obesity, sedentary lifestyle, excess alcohol intake, and high sodium intake are all thought
to promote the development of essential hypertension.[20] [23] [24] [25] [26]
Secondary hypertension
In a minority of cases, an underlying, often reversible cause can be found. This may be suspected in a
younger patient (<40 years of age), when blood pressure is resistant to first-line medication, or if previously
well-controlled hypertension suddenly becomes difficult to manage without any change in medication
adherence.
Vascular
• One of the most common secondary causes of hypertension is renal artery stenosis. This may be
entirely asymptomatic but, if hypertension is difficult to control and the patient is young, renal artery
stenosis should be excluded. Stenosis is usually due to fibromuscular dysplasia or atherosclerosis, but
other causes include extrinsic compression of the artery by an adjacent tumor or a proximal aneurysm
of the renal artery.
• Coarctation of the aorta is a congenital narrowing of the aorta. When presenting in adults with
hypertension, this narrowing is usually distal to the ligamentum arteriosum, although coarctation can
occur before or at the site of the ligamentous insertion. There is usually hypertension in the upper
limbs but weak or absent pulses in the lower limbs. This combination of signs will raise suspicion of a
coarctation on clinical exam.
• Preeclampsia is a syndrome of hypertension with proteinuria in pregnant women. Its exact cause is
unknown, but the placenta is thought to release factors, perhaps in response to hypoxia, that affect
the vascular endothelium in susceptible women. It can also occur up to 2 months after birth. Women
with preexisting hypertension, diabetes, or autoimmune disease are thought to be at greater risk of
developing preeclampsia.
Renal
• Chronic kidney disease: a decrease in the glomerular filtration rate will stimulate the kidneys to up-
regulate production of renin to raise the blood pressure and renal perfusion. Fluid overload will also
contribute as the kidneys fail to excrete volumes required for homeostasis. Both of these mechanisms
can lead to hypertension.
• Nephrotic syndrome: a syndrome of proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, and edema caused by damage to
the filtering capability of the renal glomeruli. Hypertension in this setting is not common, but can occur
due to salt and water retention and fluid overload. ACE inhibitors are the first-choice agent for blood
pressure control in nephrotic syndrome, as they may also reduce proteinuria.
• Glomerulonephritis: a condition characterized by inflammation of the glomeruli. Hypertension is a main
feature of this syndrome, via mechanisms similar to those in chronic renal failure.
• Obstructive uropathy: this can produce hydronephrosis, and the back-pressure on the kidneys can
result in renal failure and elevated blood pressure through similar mechanisms.
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Theory
• Polycystic kidneys: hypertension is a common presenting symptom, and it is often apparent before
renal function abnormalities. Hypertension with polycystic kidney disease can present at a young age
(20 to 34 years) and is associated with a high incidence of left ventricular hypertrophy.
Endocrine
• Pheochromocytoma: this is a neuroendocrine tumor of the adrenal glands. Hypertension results
from excessive secretion of epinephrine and norepinephrine. It can also occur as part of a multiple
endocrine neoplasia syndrome. Patients may present with malignant hypertension or hypertension that
is resistant to usual pharmacologic therapy.[27]
• Hyperaldosteronism: excess production of aldosterone by the adrenal glands results in sodium and
water retention and potassium excretion. The excess production of aldosterone is usually due to a
solitary adrenal adenoma (Conn syndrome), but hyperaldosteronism and consequent hypertension
can also be the result of adrenal hyperplasia. Despite the fact that primary hyperaldosteronism is the
most common cause for secondary hypertension, it is a diagnosis that is frequently missed.[28]
• Cushing syndrome: excess production of cortisol by a pituitary or adrenal tumor, or the use of
exogenous corticosteroids, can result in Cushing syndrome. It can be adrenocorticotropic hormone-
dependent or -independent. Hypertension results as cortisol enhances the vasoconstrictor effect of
catecholamines.
• Hyperthyroidism: may be a secondary cause of hypertension in approximately 1% to 3% of
hypertensive patients; data are sparse.[29] [30] Excess thyroxine exacerbates the effect of the
sympathetic nervous system. It thereby increases vascular resistance and cardiac output. This can
lead to an isolated systolic hypertension. Hypertension should respond to treatment of the underlying
cause.
• Hypothyroidism: may be a secondary cause of hypertension in approximately 1% to 3% of
hypertensive patients; data are sparse.[29][30] [31] Low levels of circulating thyroid hormone may
result in mild hypertension as the heart rate is slowed and there is an increase in peripheral vascular
resistance to compensate.[32] [33] [34] Hypothyroidism can also cause elevation of cholesterol and
lipid levels in the blood, thus increasing overall cardiovascular risk if left untreated.
• Hyperparathyroidism: hypertension is often noted in patients with hyperparathyroidism, but a causative
relationship has not been proven and the mechanism is unclear.
Sleep disorders
• Patients with obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome, or obesity hypoventilation syndrome, are
often obese, with an increased risk for hypertension.[35] [36] [37] [38] They also have an increased
risk of myocardial infarction and stroke. The mechanism is unclear but may involve oxidative stress
secondary to hypoxia and sympathetic autonomic activation. Such patients often have a number of
cardiovascular risk factors that need to be addressed alongside treatment of their hypertension and
sleep apnea/hypopnea and obesity-related conditions.
Toxic causes
• Chronic alcohol excess: the relationship between alcohol, hypertension, and overall cardiovascular
risk is complex and a J-shaped relationship has been suggested, with those who drink a small amount
of alcohol having a lower risk than those who abstain completely. However, in various studies, people
who misuse alcohol demonstrate a marked decrease in blood pressure readings when subject to
alcohol abstinence (after an initial increase during the withdrawal phase). The mechanisms are
unclear.[39]
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Theory
THEORY
• Illicit drug use such as cocaine and methamphetamine misuse can lead to hypertension due to
sympathetic activation. The potential for reduced compliance with antihypertensive therapy in this
patient population may result in persistent high blood pressure.
Medications
• In a nationally representative survey study in the US, 18% of adults with hypertension reported taking
medications that may cause elevated blood pressure, most commonly antidepressants, prescription
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), steroids and estrogens.[40]
• Use of oral contraceptives and long-term use of NSAIDs have both been implicated in the development
of hypertension: the former due to the effects of progesterone on small blood vessels; NSAIDs through
effects on the kidney and fluid retention in susceptible individuals. Hypertension will usually respond to
discontinuation of the drugs.
• Hypertension is a common adverse effect of glucocorticoids, cyclosporine, and atypical antipsychotics.
• Up to 80% of patients treated with vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors
for metastatic solid organ malignancy develop hypertension.[41]
Pseudohypertension
• "White-coat hypertension" is an apparent elevation of blood pressure when readings are taken in
a clinical environment. The patient may have their own blood pressure monitor at home and report
normal readings. This apparent elevation is usually ascribed to anxiety or stress at having their blood
pressure measured. It may subside with repeat measurements over time, or persist in the clinical
environment. One way to distinguish true hypertension from falsely elevated readings is to record
blood pressure over a 24-hour period or arrange measurements at home. This will avoid unnecessary
treatment, although overall cardiovascular risk must still be evaluated. These patients need close
follow-up, as it has been shown that untreated white-coat hypertension is associated with an increased
cardiovascular risk.[42]
Resistant hypertension
Resistant hypertension (RH) is defined as above-goal elevated blood pressure despite the concurrent use of
three antihypertensive drug classes, commonly including a long-acting calcium channel blocker, a blocker of
the renin-angiotensin system (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker), and
a diuretic.[9]
Consider causes of secondary hypertension in patients with RH.
Consider nonadherence and white-coat hypertension as causes of apparent treatment-resistant
hypertension. Estimates of nonadherence to hypertension medication range from 7% to 60%.[9] The
American Heart Association recommends using the following question to assess adherence: “When taking
multiple medications, it is common to miss doses throughout the week. How many times do you miss
taking your blood pressure medication in a week?”[9] White-coat hypertension can be excluded by 24-hour
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring or home blood pressure measurements. 
Poor blood pressure measurement technique can give falsely elevated blood pressure readings.
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Emergencies
Urgent considerations
(See  Differentials  for more details)
Severe elevations in blood pressure are classified as either emergencies or urgencies.[43] In hypertensive
emergencies there is severe hypertension (>180/120 mmHg) with evidence of new or worsening end
organ damage.[2] This is an immediate threat to the cardiovascular system and the patient. In hypertensive
urgencies, there is severe hypertension but the patient is otherwise stable with no evidence of acute or
impending change in end organ damage or dysfunction.[2]
True hypertensive emergencies include hypertensive encephalopathy, hypertensive left ventricular failure,
and acute aortic dissection. The management of these conditions includes immediate treatment in an
intensive care setting with controlled gradual reduction in blood pressure. Initial laboratory tests should
include a full blood profile and urine analysis to search for an underlying cause. Tests such as cardiac
enzymes, thyroid function tests, urinary catecholamines, and vanillylmandelic acid may also be required.
Elevations in blood urea nitrogen and creatinine, elevated sodium and phosphate levels, high or low
potassium levels (particularly in hyperaldosteronism, as a result of renal potassium wasting), and acidosis
are some of the common findings.
Imaging studies such as a chest x-ray and renal ultrasound scan can also help rule out underlying etiology.
Computerized tomography of the head to assess for intracranial hemorrhage or infarction or space-occupying
lesions may also be indicated. A 12-lead ECG is useful to assess for cardiac ischemia or infarct, presence
of left ventricular hypertrophy, and evidence of electrolyte disturbance or effects of drug overdose. If
left untreated, these conditions are associated with a high mortality and morbidity. Fortunately, with the
widespread use of antihypertensive agents, they are less commonly seen overall.[43] [44] [45]
Specific hypertensive emergencies
Hypertensive encephalopathy
• This is a symptom complex of severe hypertension with headache, vomiting, visual disturbance,
mental status changes, seizure, and papilledema. Cardiac symptoms such as angina, myocardial
infarction, and pulmonary edema may occasionally be the main presenting symptoms.
Hypertensive left ventricular failure
• Symptoms are those of decompensated cardiac failure with shortness of breath, pulmonary edema,
lethargy, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and orthopnea. A cough productive of frothy pink sputum may
be reported. Left heart failure can lead to biventricular failure, and there may be signs of peripheral
edema and hepatomegaly. An echocardiogram will usually be indicated, and imaging of the coronary
arteries may be helpful as reversible cardiac ischemia may improve symptoms and prognosis.
Acute aortic dissection
• Typically presents with acute, severe chest pain with "ripping" or "tearing" characteristics. It may
radiate to the back or jaw. Syncope, altered cognition, and anxiety are common neurologic symptoms.
An interarm blood pressure difference of >20 mmHg is suggestive but not diagnostic of an acute aortic
dissection. Treatment will depend on the portion of the aorta that is affected and may include surgical
repair, endovascular stenting, or medical therapy alone. All patients require close monitoring and
intensive treatment of blood pressure and pulse, usually in a high-dependency or intensive care unit
with appropriate specialist input.
EMERGENCIES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
See Hypertensive Emergencies .
Hypertensive urgencies
Malignant or accelerated hypertension
• Malignant hypertension is associated with potentially irreversible hypertension-mediated organ
damage that occurs over days or weeks, rather than minutes, and is therefore classified as an
urgency. It is characterized by very high blood pressure in association with bilateral retinal changes,
including exudates and hemorrhages, with or without papilledema. The most common symptoms
include headaches (often occipital), visual disturbances, chest pain, dyspnea, and neurologic deficits.
Consequences include cerebral infarction or hemorrhage, transient blindness or paralyses, seizures,
stupor, or coma. Malignant hypertension often has a renal cause, and proteinuria, microscopic
hematuria, red blood cell, and hyaline casts in urine are typical. See Hypertensive Emergencies .
Asymptomatic high blood pressure
• This is a common occurrence, where an asymptomatic patient (either known to have hypertension
on treatment or previously not known to have hypertension), is found to have very high readings in
the "accelerated hypertension" range. If there are any signs of retinal involvement, they should be
managed as per "malignant hypertension" or "accelerated hypertension" guidelines. However, if there
is no hypertension-mediated organ involvement, they should be evaluated for the cause of the high
blood pressure.
• If a patient is already on antihypertensive medications, care should be taken to check compliance
or worsening renal function. If the increase in blood pressure has occurred over time, it could simply
reflect the need to up-titrate drug dosage, as the current dosage may not be sufficient. A history
of illicit drug use should also be sought, as this can cause a sudden increase in blood pressure.
Screening for a secondary cause is also important.
• If the patient is drug-naive, then they should be managed as per any individual with newly diagnosed
hypertension, with screening for secondary causes, end organ damage, and cardiovascular risk.
Preeclampsia
• Preeclampsia is new-onset persistent hypertension, with either proteinuria or evidence of systemic
involvement, that occurs in pregnant women after 20 weeks' gestation. Women with preeclampsia
require specialist obstetric care. The details of diagnosis and management are beyond the scope of
this topic. See Preeclampsia . 
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
Approach
Hypertension is usually asymptomatic, but patients may present with headaches, nosebleeds, visual
symptoms, or neurologic symptoms. The main aims of history-taking are to identify symptoms suggestive
of a secondary cause, to establish concomitant risk factors for cardiovascular disease, and to seek any
symptoms suggestive of hypertension-mediated organ damage.[3] [7][8]
Often there are no physical signs. However, a full exam for any signs of an underlying condition or
hypertension-mediated organ damage is recommended. This should include height, weight, waist
circumference, palpation and auscultation of the heart and carotid arteries, palpation of peripheral pulses,
neurologic examination, and fundoscopy. An absence of symptoms or end organ damage with a history of
normal blood pressure readings outside the clinical environment may occur with pseudohypertension.
Baseline screening tests are useful in all patients to look for complications of hypertension. Specific tests
are only recommended if the clinical suspicion of an underlying secondary cause is high, as the majority of
patients will have essential (primary) hypertension.
Blood pressure measurement
There are various types of blood pressure measurement techniques, each with their own benefits and
limitations.[46]
Clinic-based blood pressure measurement
Before a diagnosis of hypertension can be confirmed, it is essential that the blood pressure is checked
correctly, using a clinically validated and accurate device.[3] [7][8] The patient should sit quietly for at least
5 minutes with the arm exposed and supported at the level of the heart, and the back resting against a
chair. Ideally they should not have consumed caffeine or smoked tobacco within 30 minutes before testing.
Canadian guidelines recommend electronic (oscillometric) upper arm devices instead of using auscultation to
measure blood pressure in the office setting.[47]
If an automatic machine is used, it needs to be correctly calibrated, and calibration should be checked at
least every 6 months.
The correct cuff size should be used; the US guidance recommends that the bladder encircles 80% of the
arm, while the European guidance recommends that the bladder length should be 75% to 100% and the
width 35% to 50% of the arm circumference.[2] [7] It should be noted if a larger- or smaller-than-normal cuff
size is used.[2] The cuff should be positioned at the level of the heart. The patient’s back and arm should be
supported because muscle contractions can elevate blood pressure readings.
When using auscultation, the bell of the stethoscope should be used. The cuff should be inflated to at least
20 mmHg above the pressure at which the radial pulse disappears, and should be deflated at a rate of
approximately 3 mmHg/second in order to accurately identify the point at which Korotkoff sounds can first
be heard. Diastolic blood pressure in adults is measured as the point at which Korotkoff sounds disappear
(Phase V).
Blood pressure should be checked in both arms, and the arm with the higher reading should be used. A
consistent difference of >15 mmHg in systolic blood pressure between arms is associated with peripheral
vascular disease and increased cardiovascular and all-cause mortality.[48] The US guidelines recommend
at least two blood pressure readings taken 1-2 minutes apart.[2] European guidance recommends three
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
readings, with additional measurements taken if the readings differ by >10 mmHg.[7] The blood pressure
recorded should be the average of at least two readings.[2] [7]
The patient’s pulse should be palpated to exclude arrhythmia. The European Society of Cardiology (ESC)
recommends that patients with atrial fibrillation should have multiple manual auscultatory blood pressure
measurements (as few automated devices have been calibrated for use in this population). The ESC also
recommends measuring blood pressure 1 minute and 3 minutes after standing from a seated/lying position to
exclude orthostatic hypotension, (defined as a blood pressure drop of ≥20/10 mmHg 1 and/or 3 minutes after
standing following a 5 minute seated or lying position).[7]
Automated office blood pressure (AOBP) is intended to more accurately measure blood pressure.[49] [50]
Multiple measurements are taken while the patient is alone in a quiet room, sitting with legs uncrossed, back
supported, and arm supported at heart level. Depending on the device used, 3 to 6 measurements are taken
over a short time period and the mean blood pressure is calculated.[51] When using AOBP, hypertension is
defined as ≥135/85 mmHg.
Out-of-office blood pressure measurement
Before therapy is initiated, 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) or regular home
monitoring is recommended to document true hypertension outside the office setting.[7][52] [53] [54] [55]
 One meta-analysis comparing clinic-based with home-based ABPM found that neither clinic- nor home-
based measurements had sufficient sensitivity and specificity to be used as a single diagnostic test, and that
doing so may lead to substantial over-diagnosis.[56]
ABPM has many advantages in that it helps to diagnose "white-coat hypertension" and masked
hypertension, recognizes episodes of symptomatic hypotension, and identifies dipping patterns and early
morning surges in blood pressure. Masked hypertension is defined as a normal blood pressure in the clinic or
office (<130/90 mmHg), but an elevated blood pressure out of the clinic (ambulatory daytime blood pressure
or home blood pressure >135/85 mmHg). There is no universal agreement on definitions of hypertension
measured by out-of-office blood pressure monitoring, but European guidelines suggest a cutoff of 135/85
mmHg for daytime ABPM or home blood pressure.[7] The US American College of Cardiology (ACC) and
American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines report estimates for corresponding home, daytime, night-
time, and 24-hour ambulatory levels of BP e.g., an office blood pressure measurement of 130/80 mmHg
corresponds to a home blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, a daytime ABPM of 130/80 mmHg, a night-time
ABPM of 110/65 mmHg, and a 24-hour ABPM of 125/75 mmHg.[2]
The US Preventive Services Task Force recommends ABPM as the preferred method of out-of-office blood
pressure measurement, followed by home blood pressure monitoring.[57]
Home blood pressure readings should be recorded using a validated monitor when the patient is seated, with
their back and arm supported, after 5 minutes’ rest. Two readings should be recorded, 1-2 minutes apart, in
the morning (before taking medication) and again in the evening. Measurements should be taken for at least
3 days, ideally 7. The home blood pressure reading is the average of all of the measurements.[7]
Screening for hypertension
As most people with hypertension are asymptomatic, regular blood pressure measurements are
recommended to detect the condition. The ACC/AHA recommend yearly measurements following an initial
blood pressure evaluation. Adults with an elevated blood pressure should have a repeat evaluation in 3-6
months.[2]
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
The European Society of Cardiology recommends that opportunistic screening for elevated blood pressure
and hypertension should be considered at least every 3 years for adults <40 years, and at least once a year
for adults ≥40 years.[7] For those with elevated blood pressure who do not meet the criteria for treatment, the
European Society of Cardiology recommends a repeat risk assessment and blood pressure measurement
within 1 year.[7]
Concomitant cardiovascular risk factors
Establishing concomitant cardiovascular risk factors is essential to define overall cardiovascular risk.
• Smoking: enquiries should include type of cigarette or tobacco, quantity, and duration of habit. Patients
have a tendency to under-report, and nonsmokers may be exposed to passive cigarette smoking in the
home if a partner is a heavy smoker.
• Diabetes mellitus: this is a strong risk factor for cardiovascular disease. The target blood pressure for a
diabetic hypertensive patient is 130/80 mmHg.
• Known ischemic heart disease or previous myocardial infarction.
• Previous stroke or transient ischemic attack.
• Elevation of cholesterol or triglycerides: patients may be unaware of such elevation if they have never
been tested.
• Family history of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, or renal disease.
Identification of a secondary cause
Although in the majority of patients hypertension is primary/essential, there are certain features that may lead
to a suspicion of an underlying cause (secondary hypertension):
• Young patient (<40 years)
• Rapid onset of hypertension
• Sudden change in blood pressure readings when previously well controlled on a particular therapy
• Resistant hypertension that is unresponsive to pharmacologic therapies.
If a secondary cause is suspected, then the presence of specific symptoms may suggest a particular cause
and guide further investigations:
• Flash pulmonary edema or widespread atherosclerosis may indicate renal artery stenosis
• Cold legs may indicate poor distal perfusion secondary to aortic coarctation
• Swelling and hypertension in a pregnant patient should raise suspicion of preeclampsia
• Edema and reports of foamy urine in a nonpregnant patient may represent nephrotic syndrome
• A history of renal impairment, prostatic enlargement, previous urethral instrumentation, or renal calculi
is consistent with obstructive uropathy or chronic kidney disease
• A family history of polycystic kidney disease, intracranial aneurysms, or subarachnoid hemorrhage in a
young patient (age 20-34 years) with hypertension is strongly suggestive of polycystic kidney disease
• Endocrine causes may present with numerous nonspecific symptoms, but pheochromocytoma usually
has episodic symptoms consistent with a hyperadrenergic state, such as panic attacks, sweating,
palpitations, and abdominal cramps
• Symptoms of low potassium, such as headaches, nocturia, and paresthesiae, may indicate
hyperaldosteronism, although the majority of patients with this condition are normokalemic
• Typical symptoms of Cushing syndrome are depression, weight gain, hirsutism, easy bruising, and low
libido
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
• Heat intolerance, sweating, palpitations, and weight loss may indicate an excess of thyroxine, while
lethargy, constipation, weight gain, and depression are common findings with low circulating thyroxine
levels
• Symptoms of bone pain, paresthesiae, and myalgia may suggest hyperparathyroidism
• Excessive daytime sleepiness in an obese patient, who may also complain of erectile dysfunction
and restless sleep, may be a symptom of obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome, or obesity
hypoventilation syndrome. Partners are likely to give a history of loud snoring
• Toxic causes include use of oral contraceptives, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or chronic
alcohol excess.
Physical findings suggestive of a secondary cause include the following:
• Renal bruits may be audible with renal artery stenosis
• Enlarged kidneys may be palpated in polycystic kidney disease. There may be accompanying
hepatomegaly or a hernia
• Arteriovenous fistulae may be present in a patient with end-stage kidney disease
• Flank tenderness or prostatic enlargement on rectal exam may suggest a cause of obstructive
uropathy
• Facial edema or limb edema in a pregnant patient warrants urinary collection for proteinuria as
suggestive of preeclampsia
• Edema in a nonpregnant patient might be due to nephrotic syndrome
• Radiofemoral delay and a disparity in blood pressure readings between the arms may be
demonstrated with coarctation of the aorta, along with systolic or continuous cardiac murmurs. Distal
pulses may be weak or impalpable
• Cushing syndrome has well defined features, typically described as a moon face, thin arms and legs,
truncal obesity, striae, and skin thinning
• Isolated eyelid edema with dry skin and a thick tongue may suggest hypothyroidism, while
exophthalmos, proptosis, and lid lag suggest hyperthyroidism due to Graves disease
• The deposition of calcium just inside the iris, or palpation of jaw tumors, raises the possibility of
hyperparathyroidism
• Obesity predisposes to obesity hypoventilation syndrome. Obesity, maxillomandibular abnormalities,
and macroglossia predispose to obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome
• Chronic alcohol excess can result in a myriad of signs, such as jaundice, hepatomegaly, spider nevi,
ascites, and general neglect of appearance.
Hypertension-mediated organ damage
Cardiovascular disease
• Symptoms of cardiac failure include shortness of breath, ankle edema, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea,
orthopnea. Angina may also be reported. Exam may reveal cardiac murmurs, thrills, or heaves.
• Left ventricular hypertrophy diagnosed either by echocardiography or by electrocardiogram is well
documented. It has prognostic utility in patients with hypertension.[58]
Cerebrovascular disease
• Any history of symptoms suggestive of transient ischemic attack or stroke should be obtained. These
may include speech difficulties, visual disturbance, or transient focal neurology.
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
• Carotid bruits may indicate carotid artery stenosis and warrant further duplex imaging to determine
blood flow and degree of stenosis.
• There may be residual functional loss after a stroke.
Renal failure
• May be asymptomatic, but urinary symptoms such as decreased or increased frequency of urination,
pruritus, lethargy, and weight loss may suggest renal damage.
Retinopathy
• This is often asymptomatic, but may present with visual loss or headaches.
• Hypertensive retinopathy on fundoscopy is characterized by:
• Arteriolar narrowing (graded 1-4, depending on the degree of narrowing)
• Arteriolar venous nipping (constriction of veins at crossing points)
• "Cotton wool spots" on the retina (due to ischemic changes)
• Flame hemorrhages or papilledema.
•
Hypertensive retinopathy
From the collection of Sunil Nadar, MBBS, FRCP,
FESC, FACC and Gregory Lip, MD, FRCP, FESC, FACC
Initial investigations
Baseline screening tests are useful in all patients to look for complications of hypertension.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
• An ECG can be easily performed and is useful to seek signs of previous myocardial infarction or left
ventricular hypertrophy (a key prognostic factor). Echocardiography may be reserved for patients with
clinical suspicion of cardiac failure or left ventricular hypertrophy.
• A chest x-ray is helpful to look for evidence of cardiomegaly, widening of the left subclavian border,
and a double bulge at the site of the aortic knuckle. This may be seen in coarctation of the aorta, along
with notching of the ribs due to large collateral circulation.
• Initial blood tests should include BUN, electrolytes, and creatinine, with random blood sugar and
serum cholesterol (as part of overall cardiovascular risk assessment). If diabetes is suspected, a
fasting blood sugar test is required. Potassium levels may be low in hyperaldosteronism, but are
usually normal.
• A urine dip test is performed to look for glycosuria and proteinuria, and the presence of casts may help
determine an underlying renal cause, such as glomerulonephritis or nephrotic syndrome.
Subsequent investigations
Specific tests are only recommended if the clinical suspicion of an underlying secondary cause is high, as
the majority of patients will have essential hypertension. These include:
Blood tests
• Plasma renin and aldosterone levels if hyperaldosteronism is suspected. Adrenal vein sampling to
compare the ratio of renin to aldosterone in each kidney. A ratio >2 suggests an aldosterone-secreting
tumor.[60] [61]
• Plasma renin activity is elevated in most patients with renal artery stenosis and is a good screening
test.[62] A renal angiogram is the most specific and sensitive test.[63]
• Late-night salivary cortisol will be elevated in Cushing disease, and this can be confirmed with the
overnight dexamethasone suppression test.[64]
• Liver function tests may be a useful screening tool if chronic alcohol excess and liver dysfunction are
suspected.
• Thyroid function tests, if clinical history leads to suspicion of hyper- or hypothyroidism.[7]
• Serum calcium levels can be measured if hyperparathyroidism is a possibility.
Urine tests
• 24-hour urine collection to measure: catecholamines to exclude a pheochromocytoma; protein levels
in suspected preeclampsia or nephrotic syndrome. However, in the case of preeclampsia and nephritic
syndrome, a spot urine creatinine ratio can offer comparable results.
Imaging
• Ultrasound of kidneys and adrenal glands: a unilateral small kidney would be suspicious of chronic
pyelonephritis or renal artery stenosis (causing renal atresia). Bilateral shrunken kidneys are
consistent with chronic renal failure. Hydronephrosis may confirm an obstructive cause. This could be
followed by a computed tomography (CT) pyelogram if renal calculi are strongly suspected. Polycystic
kidneys are easily visualized on abdominal ultrasound.
• CT of adrenals: this can be used to localize a pheochromocytoma if urinary catecholamines are
suggestive of the diagnosis.
• Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): can be used to investigate renal artery stenosis if a renal
angiogram is contraindicated. It can identify and characterize an aortic coarctation, and be used
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
to plan further treatment.[65] MRI is also useful for imaging the adrenals to localize a tumor in
hyperaldosteronism or pheochromocytoma.
Biopsy
• Renal biopsy: this is a definitive test to elicit the underlying cause of nephrotic syndrome.
Special tests for suspected obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS)
• For the screening of obstructive sleep apnea, the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
suggests considering the STOP-Bang Model.[36] This consists of a questionnaire asking about loud
snoring, witnessed apneas, excessive daytime sleepiness, and hypertension combined with body
mass index, age, neck circumference thresholds, plus sex.
• The patient's level of daytime fatigue can be assessed using the Epworth Sleepiness Scale.[36] [66]
[67] However, the American Heart Association recommend against its use as a screening tool, due to
its low sensitivity (42%).[38]
• Polysomnography is currently the definitive test. It includes electroencephalogram, electro-
oculographic recording, air flow assessment, electromyogram, capnography, esophageal manometry,
ECG, and pulse oximetry.[36]
See Obstructive sleep apnea in adults .
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials overview
Common
Essential hypertension
Renal artery stenosis
Chronic kidney disease
Obstructive uropathy
Obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
Uncommon
Coarctation of aorta
Preeclampsia
Glomerulonephritis
Nephrotic syndrome
Polycystic kidney disease
Pheochromocytoma
Hyperaldosteronism
Cushing disease/syndrome
Hyperthyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Hyperparathyroidism
Chronic alcohol excess
Medication
Illicit drug use
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
Uncommon
"White-coat hypertension"
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials
Common
◊ Essential hypertension
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
often asymptomatic;
headaches, visual
disturbance,
nosebleeds, or
neurologic symptoms
possible
may have signs of
end organ damage;
heave due to left
ventricular hypertrophy,
retinopathy, functional
deficit following stroke;
lack of signs to suggest
a secondary cause
»ECG: normal,
evidence of previous
MI or left axis deviation
with left ventricular
hypertrophy
»BUN/creatinine:
normal, or elevated with
renal impairment
»serum cholesterol:
variable
»random blood
glucose: >8 mmol/L
on nonfasting sample
suggestive of comorbid
diabetes and fasting
blood sugar advised
»urinalysis: may be
normal
Performed to check for
glycosuria, proteinuria,
and casts.
◊ Renal artery stenosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
often asymptomatic;
headaches, visual
disturbance,
nosebleeds, or
neurologic symptoms
possible; difficult-to-
treat hypertension;
peripheral vascular
disease; may present
with flash pulmonary
edema
bruit over the abdomen »plasma renin
activity: elevated
»renal angiogram:
narrowing of renal
artery
»renal MRI: narrowing
of renal artery
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
Common
◊ Chronic kidney disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
known renal
impairment; usually
asymptomatic;
may present with
headaches, visual
disturbances,
neurologic deficits (e.g.,
transient ischemic
attack or stroke),
or nose bleeds,
fatigue, nausea,
anorexia; difficult-to-
treat hypertension
suggests possible renal
cause[68]
features of chronic
renal failure: edema,
arteriovenous fistulae,
pale conjunctiva
secondary to anemia
»urinalysis:
albuminuria, casts in
the urine
»BUN/creatinine:
elevated creatinine and
BUN
»renal ultrasound:
small kidneys
◊ Obstructive uropathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
variable depending
on cause; may report
previous urethral
instrumentation,
flank pain with
nephrolithiasis,
hesitancy, frequency,
and poor stream with
prostatic enlargement
variable; enlarged
prostate on rectal
exam, flank tenderness
with renal calculi
»renal ultrasound:
may show
hydronephrosis or small
kidneys with resultant
chronic renal failure
»BUN/creatinine:
elevated creatinine
»noncontrast
CT pyelogram:
demonstrates renal
calculi if present
◊ Obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
sleeping for long
periods of time, loud
snoring, excessive
daytime sleepiness,
restless sleep, erectile
dysfunction, morning
headaches, GERD, and
weight gain. Total score
of ≥11 on Epworth
sleepiness scale
supports the diagnosis.
maxillomandibular
abnormalities,
macroglossia
»polysomnography:
apnea/hypopnea index
(AHI) ≥15 episodes/
hour or AHI ≥5 events/
hour with symptoms
Polysomnography is the
definitive test.[69]
General parameters
measured include
electroencephalogram,
electro-oculographic
recording, air
»fiberoptic
endoscopy: may see
nasal polyps or tumors,
or hypertrophic lingual
tonsils
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
flow assessment,
electromyogram,
capnography,
esophageal
manometry, ECG,
pulse oximetry,
respiratory effort
signals, synchronized
polysomnography
video, and body
position.[70]
Polysomnography may
be a full night study or a
split study.
»portable
multichannel sleep
tests: Respiratory
Event Index (REI) of
≥15 episodes/hour or
REI ≥5 with symptoms
Used for patients with
higher probability
of OSA and without
complex comorbidities
(e.g., cardiopulmonary
disease, chronic
opioid therapy, or
neuromuscular
disease).
Portable tests
typically include a
smaller selection of
channels than the
polysomnogram (nasal
pressure, oximetry,
thoracoabdominal
effort sensors, heart
rate), but usually do not
measure sleep.
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
Common
◊ Obstructive sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Portable tests may
underestimate the REI
as obstructions are
measured for recording
time, not sleep time.
◊ Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/
m²), dyspnea, nocturia,
lower extremity edema,
excessive daytime
sleepiness, fatigue,
loud disruptive snoring,
witnessed apneas,
waking headaches,
unexplained
polycythemia
mild hypoxemia
awake, with significant
hypoxemia when
asleep, awake daytime
hypercapnia
»serum bicarbonate:
>24 mEq/L (>24 mmol/
L)
May be used to
screen for the
presence of alveolar
hypoventilation, but
does not confirm the
diagnosis.
Guidelines recommend
serum bicarbonate
levels for patients
with low to moderate
probability of having
OHS (<20%) to decide
when to measure
PaCO₂.[71]
»Arterial blood gas:
PaCO₂ >45 mmHg
Awake resting PaCO₂
>45 mmHg at sea
level (awake daytime
hypercapnia), in the
presence of obesity
(BMI ≥30 kg/m²) and
sleep disordered
breathing defines
OHS (after excluding
other causes of
hypoventilation).[71]
»polysomnography:
demonstrates
hypoventilation,
particularly during REM
sleep
Identifies associated
obstructive sleep
apnea in patients
with OHS.[72] In
addition, it may identify
patients with OHS
prior to developing
awake elevations in
PaCO₂.[73]
General parameters
measured include
electroencephalogram,
electro-oculographic
recording, air
flow assessment,
electromyogram,
capnography,
esophageal
manometry, ECG,
pulse oximetry,
respiratory effort
signals, synchronized
polysomnography
video, and body
position.[70]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Measure first in patients
strongly suspected of
having OHS to confirm
the diagnosis.[37] 
Uncommon
Coarctation of aorta
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
often asymptomatic;
headaches, visual
disturbance,
nosebleeds, or
neurologic symptoms
possible; cold legs,
sweating
disparity in the blood
pressure readings
between both arms
(left arm typically 20
mmHg lower than the
right arm), radiofemoral
delay, systolic or
continuous murmurs
over lateral chest wall,
absence of pedal
pulses
»ECG: left ventricular
hypertrophy
»echocardiogram:
left ventricular
hypertrophy ± bicuspid
aortic valve
There is a 70%
association between
aortic coarctation and a
bicuspid aortic valve.
»chest x-ray: widening
of left subclavian
border, double bulge
above and below the
usual site of the aortic
knuckle, rib notching
due to collaterals
»MRI scan of
aorta: coarctation is
clearly defined and
used to plan further
management
Preeclampsia
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
pregnant woman,
>20 weeks' gestation,
usually >32 weeks,
can be asymptomatic,
may have facial or limb
swelling, may have
epigastric pain that
radiates to the back
newly elevated blood
pressure >140/90
mmHg on 2 readings 6
hours apart, may have
facial or limb pitting
edema
»urinalysis/24-hour
urine collection:
positive reagent strip
test; urinary excretion
of ≥300 mg of protein
in 24 hours; or urine
protein:creatinine
ratio ≥30 mg/mmol;
albumin:creatinine ratio
of ≥8 mg/mmol; may be
normal
»fetal ultrasound:
variable depending on
severity; fetal biometry
may reveal fetal growth
restriction
»coagulation screen:
typically normal
Usually normal
in a woman with
preeclampsia. May
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
Uncommon
Preeclampsia
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
The presence of
proteinuria is no
longer mandatory
in the diagnosis
of preeclampsia;
systemic involvement
or fetal growth
restriction together
with hypertension
are enough to fulfil
the diagnosis, even
in the absence of
proteinuria.[74] [75]
»placental growth
factor: low
If available,
measurement of
maternal placental
growth factor (between
20 weeks and 36
weeks and 6 days of
pregnancy) may reduce
time to diagnosis of
preeclampsia, with
consequent reduction
in incidence of severe
maternal adverse
outcomes.[76] [77] [78]
be abnormal with
advanced disease
affecting the liver, or
in association with
abruption.
◊ Glomerulonephritis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
nausea, malaise,
weight loss, fever,
features of underlying
etiology (e.g.,
arthralgia)
edema with nephrotic
features, hypervolemia,
signs of underlying
etiology; skin rash
»urinalysis:
dysmorphic red blood
cells, subnephrotic
proteinuria, and active
sediment
»24-hour urine
collection: proteinuria
is generally <3.5 g/day
»renal biopsy:
characteristic
findings on light and
immunofluorescence
microscopy
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Nephrotic syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
swelling of the legs,
hands, face; foamy
urine
hypoalbuminemia,
xanthelasma, edema
»spot urinary
albumin to
creatinine ratio: >3.5
This corresponds to a
24-hour urine collection
of 3.5 g of protein.[79]
»urinary microscopy:
cellular casts
»renal biopsy:
variable
Used to establish
underlying cause.
◊ Polycystic kidney disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
hematuria, headaches,
abdominal pain,
elevated blood pressure
often presenting feature
in young patients (20 to
34 years); family history
of polycystic kidneys, or
intracranial aneurysm,
or subarachnoid
hemorrhage
palpable kidneys;
hepatomegaly,
inguinal, incisional, and
paraumbilical hernias
are not uncommon
»renal ultrasound:
30 years of age: at
least 2 unilateral or
bilateral cysts; 30-59
years of age: 2 cysts in
each kidney; >60 years
of age: 4 cysts in each
kidney
»urinalysis:
proteinuria, increased
urinary albumin
excretion, and
hematuria are common
Increased urinary
albumin excretion
indicates higher risk
of progression to
chronic kidney disease
and correlates with a
higher incidence of left
ventricular hypertrophy.
Pheochromocytoma
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
usually asymptomatic;
may present with
headaches, visual
disturbances,
neurologic deficits (e.g.,
no specific
findings, features of
hypertension-mediated
organ damage possible
»urinary
catecholamines,
vanillylmandelic
acid, and
metanephrins: levels
»CT or MRI of
adrenals: localization
of lesion if presence
suggested by initial
tests
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
Uncommon
Pheochromocytoma
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
transient ischemic
attack or stroke), or
nose bleeds, symptoms
of the hyperadrenergic
state: palpitations,
panic attacks, cold
clammy skin, pallor,
abdominal cramps[80]
twice the laboratory
reference range are
suggestive
»plasma
metanephrins: levels
twice the laboratory
reference range are
suggestive
Very sensitive, but less
specific than urinary
levels.[81]
◊ Hyperaldosteronism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
usually asymptomatic
(patients are typically
normokalemic); if
serum potassium
is low: headaches,
tiredness, nocturia,
paresthesiae, muscle
cramps, palpitations
no specific
findings, features of
hypertension-mediated
organ damage possible
»plasma potassium:
normal; low, <3.0 mmol/
L in 20% of patients
Potassium can be
falsely low with the use
of diuretics.[60]
»plasma renin
activity: decreased
The test has to be
strictly standardized
and done under
specific conditions.
Measurement should
be done at 8 a.m. and
the patient should have
been strictly recumbent
or upright for at least 2
hours. The blood must
be transported rapidly
at room temperature
to the laboratory. If
the samples are to be
stored for batch testing,
they should be rapidly
centrifuged and frozen,
»CT or MRI of
adrenals: localization
of adenoma/tumor
»adrenal vein
sampling: aldosterone
to cortisol ratio
>2 between sides
suggestive of
aldosterone-secreting
tumor
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Hyperaldosteronism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
to prevent degradation
of the molecule.[82]
◊ Cushing disease/syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
psychiatric symptoms,
weight gain, hirsutism,
easy bruisability,
decreased libido
supraclavicular fullness
due to fat deposition,
facial plethora,
violaceous striae
»late-night salivary
cortisol: elevated
»1 mg overnight
dexamethasone
suppression test:
>1.8 microgram/dL
Patient given 1 mg at
11 p.m. and cortisol
measured at 8 a.m.
the next morning.
Results affected by
medications known to
alter dexamethasone
metabolism, such
as phenytoin,
carbamazepine, and
rifampicin.
»24-hour urinary
free cortisol: >50
micrograms/24 hours
◊ Hyperthyroidism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
heat intolerance,
sweating, weight loss,
palpitations, tremor
tachycardia, proptosis,
exophthalmos, cardiac
flow murmur
»thyroid-stimulating
hormone: suppressed
Initial screening
test. A lower-than-
normal value suggests
hyperthyroidism. Any
level <0.1 mIU/L may
be associated with
symptoms; however,
clinically hyperthyroid
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Hyperthyroidism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
patients will have
undetectable levels
≤0.02 mIU/L on highly
sensitive assays.
»serum free T4:
elevated above normal
range
»serum free or total
T3: elevated above
normal range
◊ Hypothyroidism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
weight gain,
lethargy, depression,
constipation
dry skin, bradycardia,
thick tongue, eyelid
edema
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone: elevated
above normal range
»free serum T4: below
normal range
◊ Hyperparathyroidism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
fatigue, anxiety,
depression, bone pain,
paresthesiae, myalgia
band keratopathy
(deposition of calcium
just inside the iris
on eye exam), fibro-
osseous jaw tumors on
palpation (uncommon)
»serum calcium:
elevated
If high-normal and high
suspicion, should be
rechecked on separate
day after fasting.
Diagnosis only requires
elevated serum calcium
and intact serum PTH
levels. Fasting and
avoidance of venous
stasis in blood draw will
aid in accuracy.
»serum PTH levels:
normal or elevated
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Chronic alcohol excess
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
central nervous
system excitability on
withdrawal of alcohol,
dependency behavior,
tolerance; social,
economic, or legal
problems
jaundice,
hepatomegaly,
evidence of cirrhosis;
spider nevi, ascites
»diagnostic
interview: Structured
Clinical Interview
for DSM (SCID) can
be administered by
nonclinicians and can
replace a psychiatric
interview; at least 2 of
the 11 DSM-5 criteria
for alcohol use disorder
must be present
»gamma glutamyl
transferase, alanine
aminotransferase,
and aspartate
aminotransferase:
elevated
◊ Medication
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
chronic use of
nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs
or current use of
oral contraceptives,
glucocorticoids,
cyclosporine, atypical
antipsychotics, or
vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase
inhibitors
no specific exam
findings
»trial
discontinuation of
medication: elevated
blood pressure resolves
If oral contraceptive
is discontinued,
alternative
contraceptive options
should be discussed.
Illicit drug use
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of use of
vasoactive illicit
drug (e.g., cocaine,
methamphetamine)
and/or noncompliance
with prescribed
medications;
nervousness,
restlessness,
constricted or dilated
pupils, cold extremities,
tachycardia;
nervousness,
restlessness,
tremors, anxiety,
and irritability; rise in
body temperature/
hyperthermia;
»urinary toxicology:
positive for illicit drug
(e.g., cocaine or
methamphetamine)
Usually available by
contacting the local
poisons unit.
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Diagnosis
Uncommon
Illicit drug use
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
tremors, anxiety,
irritability; hostility and
exaggerated strength;
headache; abdominal
pains; hallucinations,
convulsions, delirium,
unconsciousness,
seizures
enhanced reflexes;
irregular respiration
»serum toxicology:
positive for illicit drug
(e.g., cocaine or
methamphetamine)
Usually available by
contacting the local
poisons unit.
◊ "White-coat hypertension"
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
asymptomatic, elevated
blood pressure
readings in clinic
but normal readings
at home or outside
hospital environment
no evidence of end
organ damage as
hypertension is not
sustained outside
clinical environment
»24-hour blood
pressure
monitoring: normal
"White-coat
hypertension" is
recognized as a rise in
blood pressure when
measured in the clinical
environment while
remaining normal at
other times. Usually
due to anxiety.
These patients need
close follow-up, as
it has been shown
that untreated white-
coat hypertension
is associated
with an increased
cardiovascular risk.[42]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Online resources
ONLINE RESOURCES
Online resources
1. BMJ Best Practice Podcast: hypertension (external link) (https://soundcloud.com/bmjpodcasts/bmj-
best-practice-hypertension-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-new-2017-ahaacc-guidelines)
2. ACC: ASCVD Risk Estimator Plus (external link) (http://tools.acc.org/ASCVD-Risk-Estimator-Plus/#!/
calculate/estimate)
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Evaluation of hypertension References
Key articles
• Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/
ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood
pressure in adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 May 15;71(19):e127-248. Abstract
• James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of high
blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National
Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014 Feb 5;311(5):507-20.  Full text (http://jama.jamanetwork.com/
article.aspx?articleid=1791497)   Abstract
• McEvoy JW, McCarthy CP, Bruno RM, et al. 2024 ESC guidelines for the management of elevated
blood pressure and hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2024 Oct 7;45(38):3912-4018.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/45/38/3912/7741010)
• National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management.
Nov 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng136)
• Waguespack DR, Dwyer JP. Assessment of blood pressure: techniques and implications from clinical
trials. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2019 Mar;26(2):87-91. Abstract
References
1. Lip GY. Hypertension, platelets, and the endothelium: the "thrombotic paradox" of hypertension
(or "Birmingham paradox") revisited. Hypertension. 2003 Feb;41(2):199-200.  Full text (http://
hyper.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/41/2/199)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12574081?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/
ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high
blood pressure in adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 May 15;71(19):e127-248. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29146535?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The seventh report of the Joint National Committee
on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: the JNC 7 report.
JAMA. 2003 May 21;289(19):2560-72. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12748199?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of high
blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National
Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014 Feb 5;311(5):507-20.  Full text (http://jama.jamanetwork.com/
article.aspx?articleid=1791497)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24352797?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Khera R, Lu Y, Lu J, et al. Impact of 2017 ACC/AHA guidelines on prevalence of hypertension and
eligibility for antihypertensive treatment in United States and China: nationally representative cross
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Evaluation of hypertension References
REFERENCES
sectional study. BMJ. 2018 Jul 11;362:k2357.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC6039831)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29997129?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. SPRINT Research Group; Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, Whelton PK, et al. A randomized trial of
intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med. 2015 Nov 26;373(22):2103-16.  Full
text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1511939)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/26551272?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. McEvoy JW, McCarthy CP, Bruno RM, et al. 2024 ESC guidelines for the management of elevated
blood pressure and hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2024 Oct 7;45(38):3912-4018.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/45/38/3912/7741010)
8. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management.
Nov 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng136)
9. Carey RM, Calhoun DA, Bakris GL, et al. Resistant hypertension: detection, evaluation, and
management: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2018
Nov;72(5):e53-90.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/HYP.0000000000000084)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30354828?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. NCD Risk Factor Collaboration (NCD-RisC). Worldwide trends in hypertension prevalence and
progress in treatment and control from 1990 to 2019: a pooled analysis of 1201 population-
representative studies with 104 million participants. Lancet. 2021 Sep 11;398(10304):957-80.  Full text
(https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(21)01330-1/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34450083?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Martin SS, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. 2024 heart disease and stroke statistics: a report of US and
global data from the American Heart Association. 2024 Feb 20;149(8):e347-913.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001209)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/38264914?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Falaschetti E, Mindell J, Knott C, et al. Hypertension management in England: a serial cross-
sectional study from 1994 to 2011. Lancet. 2014 May 31;383(9932):1912-9. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24881995?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Lacruz ME, Kluttig A, Hartwig S, et al. Prevalence and incidence of hypertension in the general adult
population: results of the CARLA-cohort study. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Jun;94(22):e952.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4616348)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/26039136?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Mills KT, Bundy JD, Kelly TN, et al. Global disparities of hypertension prevalence and control:
a systematic analysis of population-based studies from 90 countries. Circulation. 2016 Aug
9;134(6):441-50.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4979614)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27502908?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Thomas SJ, Booth JN 3rd, Dai C, et al. Cumulative incidence of hypertension by 55 years of
age in blacks and whites: the CARDIA study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018 Jul 11;7(14).  Full text
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Evaluation of hypertension References
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6064834)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29997132?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Ogden LG, He J, Lydick E, et al. Long-term absolute benefit of lowering blood pressure in hypertensive
patients according to the JNC VI risk stratification. Hypertension. 2000 Feb;35(2):539-43.  Full
text (http://hyper.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/35/2/539)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10679494?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. D'Anci KE, Tipton K, Hedden-Gross A, et al. Effect of intensive blood pressure lowering on
cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic review prepared for the 2020 U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs/U.S. Department of Defense Guidelines. Ann Intern Med. 2020 Dec 1;173(11):895-903.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32866419?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Nadar SK, Tayebjee MH, Meserelli F, et al. Target organ damage in hypertension: pathophysiology
and implications for drug therapy. Curr Pharm Des. 2006;12(13):1581-92. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16729871?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-specific relevance of usual blood pressure to vascular
mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet.
2002 Dec 14;360(9349):1903-13. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12493255?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Blair SN, Goodyear NN, Gibbons LW, et al. Physical fitness and incidence of hypertension in
healthy normotensive men and women. JAMA. 1984 Jul 27;252(4):487-90. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6737638?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Gerdts E, Sudano I, Brouwers S, et al. Sex differences in arterial hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2022
Dec 7;43(46):4777-88.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/46/4777/6711154?
login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36136303?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Wei LK, Au A, Teh LK, et al. Recent advances in the genetics of hypertension. Adv Exp
Med Biol. 2017;956:561-81. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27957710?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Appel LJ, Moore TJ, Obarzanek E, et al. A clinical trial of the effects of dietary patterns on blood
pressure. DASH Collaborative Research Group. N Eng J Med. 1997 Apr 17;336(16):1117-24.  Full text
(https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJM199704173361601)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9099655?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Chobanian AV, Hill M. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute workshop on sodium and blood
pressure. A critical review of current scientific evidence. Hypertension. 2000 Apr;35(4):858-63.  Full
text (http://hyper.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/35/4/858)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10775551?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Rust P, Ekmekcioglu C. Impact of salt intake on the pathogenesis and treatment of hypertension.
Adv Exp Med Biol. 2017;956:61-84. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27757935?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Evaluation of hypertension References
REFERENCES
26. Powell-Wiley TM, Poirier P, Burke LE, et al. Obesity and cardiovascular disease: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2021 May 25;143(21):e984-1010. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000973?rfr_dat=cr_pub
++0pubmed&url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33882682?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Bravo EL, Gifford RW Jr. Current concepts. Pheochromocytoma: diagnosis, localization and
management. N Engl J Med. 1984 Nov 15;311(20):1298-303. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/6149463?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Carey RM. Diagnosing and managing primary aldosteronism in hypertensive patients: a case-
based approach. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2016 Oct;18(10):97. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27566330?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Rivas AM, Pena C, Kopel J, et al. Hypertension and hyperthyroidism: association and pathogenesis.
Am J Med Sci. 2021 Jan;361(1):3-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33012487?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Young WF, Calhoun DA, Lenders JWM, et al. Screening for endocrine hypertension: an endocrine
society scientific statement. Endocrine Reviews. 2017 Apr 1; 38 (2): 103-22.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/edrv/article/38/2/103/3104343)
31. Streeten DH, Anderson GH Jr, Howland T, et al. Effects of thyroid function on blood pressure.
Recognition of hypothyroid hypertension. Hypertension. 1988 Jan;11(1):78-83.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/01.hyp.11.1.78)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/3338842?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Hofstetter L, Messerli FH. Hypothyroidism and hypertension: fact or myth? Lancet. 2018
Jan 6;391(10115):29-30.  Full text (https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/
PIIS0140-6736(17)33320-2/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29323654?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Stabouli S, Papakatsika S, Kotsis V. Hypothyroidism and hypertension. Expert Rev Cardiovasc
Ther. 2010 Nov;8(11):1559-65. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21090931?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Berta E, Lengyel I, Halmi S, et al. Hypertension in thyroid disorders. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne).
2019 Jul 17;10:482.  Full text (https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2019.00482)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31379748?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Meng F, Ma J, Wang W, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome is a risk factor of hypertension.
Minerva Med. 2016 Oct;107(5):294-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27163297?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Obstructive sleep apnoea/hypopnoea syndrome and
obesity hypoventilation syndrome in over 16s. NICE guideline NG202. Aug 2021 [internet publication]. 
Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng202)
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Evaluation of hypertension References
37. Mokhlesi B, Masa JF, Brozek JL, et al. Evaluation and Management of Obesity Hypoventilation
Syndrome. An Official American Thoracic Society Clinical Practice Guideline. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med. 2019 Aug 1;200(3):e6-e24.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201905-1071ST)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31368798?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Yeghiazarians Y, Jneid H, Tietjens JR, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea and cardiovascular disease:
a scientific tatement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2021 Jul 20;144(3):e56-67. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000988?rfr_dat=cr_pub
++0pubmed&url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34148375?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Tomson J, Lip GY. Alcohol and hypertension; an old relationship revisited. Alcohol Alcohol. 2006
Jan-Feb;41(1):3-4.  Full text (http://alcalc.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/full/41/1/3)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16239351?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Vitarello JA, Fitzgerald CJ, Cluett JL, et al. Prevalence of medications that may raise blood pressure
among adults with hypertension in the United States. JAMA Intern Med. 2022 Jan 1;182(1):90-3.  Full
text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8609458)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34807229?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Dobbin SJH, Cameron AC, Petrie MC, et al. Toxicity of cancer therapy: what the cardiologist needs
to know about angiogenesis inhibitors. Heart. 2018 Dec;104(24):1995-2002. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30228246?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Cohen JB, Lotito MJ, Trivedi UK, et al. Cardiovascular events and mortality in white coat hypertension:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2019 Jun 18;170(12):853-62.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.7326/M19-0223)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31181575?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Elliot WJ. Clinical features and management of selected hypertensive emergencies. J Clin Hypertens
(Greenwich). 2004 Oct;6(10):587-92. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15470289?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Lip GY, Beevers M, Beevers G. The failure of malignant hypertension to decline: a survey of 24 years'
experience in a multiracial population in England. J Hypertens. 1994 Nov;12(11):1297-305. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7868878?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. van den Born BJ, Koopmans RP, Groeneveld JO, et al. Ethnic disparities in the incidence, presentation
and complications of malignant hypertension. J Hypertens. 2006 Nov;24(11):2299-304. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17053554?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Waguespack DR, Dwyer JP. Assessment of blood pressure: techniques and implications from
clinical trials. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis. 2019 Mar;26(2):87-91. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31023452?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Gelfer M, Dawes M, Kaczorowski J, et al. Diagnosing hypertension: evidence supporting the 2015
recommendations of the Canadian Hypertension Education Program. Can Fam Physician. 2015
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Evaluation of hypertension References
REFERENCES
Nov;61(11):957-61.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4642903)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26564654?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Clark CE, Taylor RS, Shore AC, et al. Association of a difference in systolic blood pressure
between arms with vascular disease and mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet.
2012 Mar 10;379(9819):905-14. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22293369?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Roerecke M, Kaczorowski J, Myers MG. Comparing automated office blood pressure readings with
other methods of blood pressure measurement for identifying patients with possible hypertension:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 2019 Mar 1;179(3):351-62.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.6551)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30715088?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Boonyasai RT, McCannon EL, Landavaso JE. Automated office-based blood pressure measurement:
an overview and guidance for implementation in primary care. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2019
Apr 4;21(4):29.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1007/s11906-019-0936-9)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30949872?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Cloutier L, Daskalopoulou SS, Padwal RS, et al. A new algorithm for the diagnosis of hypertension
in Canada. Can J Cardiol. 2015 May;31(5):620-30.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0828282X15001282?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25828374?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Stergiou GS, Bliziotis IA. Home blood pressure monitoring in the diagnosis and treatment of
hypertension: a systematic review. Am J Hypertens. 2011 Feb;24(2):123-34. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20940712?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Parati G, Stergiou GS, Asmar R, et al; ESH Working Group on Blood Pressure Monitoring.
European Society of Hypertension practice guidelines for home blood pressure monitoring. J Hum
Hypertens. 2010 Dec;24(12):779-85. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20520631?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Agarwal R, Bills JE, Hecht TJ, et al. Role of home blood pressure monitoring in overcoming
therapeutic inertia and improving hypertension control: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Hypertension. 2011 Jan;57(1):29-38. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21115879?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Stergiou GS, Palatini P, Parati G, et al. 2021 European Society of Hypertension
practice guidelines for office and out-of-office blood pressure measurement. J
Hypertens. 2021 Jul 1;39(7):1293-302.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/jhypertension/
fulltext/2021/07000/2021_european_society_of_hypertension_practice.5.aspx)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33710173?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Hodgkinson J, Mant J, Martin U, et al. Relative effectiveness of clinic and home blood pressure
monitoring compared with ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in diagnosis of hypertension:
systematic review. BMJ. 2011 Jun 24;342:d3621.  Full text (http://www.bmj.com/content/342/
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Evaluation of hypertension References
bmj.d3621?view=long&pmid=21705406)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21705406?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Hypertension in adults: screening. April 2021 [internet
publication].  Full text (https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/
hypertension-in-adults-screening)
58. Cuspidi C, Vaccarella A, Negri F, et al. Resistant hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy: an
overview. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2010 Nov-Dec;4(6):319-24. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21130978?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Simundic AM, Bölenius K, Cadamuro J, et al. Joint EFLM-COLABIOCLI recommendation for venous
blood sampling. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2018;56(12):2015-38. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30004902?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Nadar S, Lip GY, Beevers DG. Primary hyperaldosteronism. Ann Clin Biochem. 2003 Sep;40(pt
5):439-52. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14503982?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Rossi GP, Sacchetto A, Chiesura-Corona M, et al. Identification of the etiology of primary
aldosteronism with adrenal vein sampling in patients with equivocal computed tomography
and magnetic resonance findings: results in 104 consecutive cases. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2001 Mar;86(3):1083-90. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11238490?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Textor SC. Renovascular hypertension in 2007: where are we now? Curr Cardiol Rep. 2007
Nov;9(6):453-61. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17999870?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Working Group on Renovascular Hypertension. Detection, evaluation, and treatment of
renovascular hypertension. Final report. Arch Intern Med. 1987 May;147(5):820-9. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2953317?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64. Fleseriu M, Auchus R, Bancos I, et al. Consensus on diagnosis and management of Cushing's
disease: a guideline update. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2021 Dec;9(12):847-75.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8743006)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34687601?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
65. Brueck M, Janka R, Daniel WG. Coarctation of the aorta. Circulation. 2001 Feb 13;103(6):E27.  Full
text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/103/6/e27)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11171804?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Nguyen AT, Baltzan MA, Small D, et al. Clinical reproducibility of the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. J Clin
Sleep Med. 2006 Apr 15;2(2):170-4.  Full text (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17557491)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17557491?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Rosenthal LD, Dolan DC. The Epworth sleepiness scale in the identification of obstructive
sleep apnea. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2008 May;196(5):429-31.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1097/
NMD.0b013e31816ff3bf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18477888?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Evaluation of hypertension References
REFERENCES
68. Sarafidis PA, Bakris GL. Resistant hypertension: an overview of evaluation and treatment. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2008 Nov 25;52(22):1749-57. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19022154?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
69. Gibson GJ. Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome: underestimated and undertreated. Br Med Bull.
2005 Mar 29:72:49-65.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/bmb/article/72/1/49/272854?login=false)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15798032?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. American Academy of Sleep Medicine. The AASM manual for the scoring of sleep and associated
events. Feb 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://aasm.org/clinical-resources/scoring-manual)
71. Erratum: evaluation and management of obesity hypoventilation syndrome. An official
American Thoracic Society clinical practice guideline. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2019 Nov
15;200(10):1326.  Full text (https://www.atsjournals.org/doi/10.1164/rccm.v200erratum7?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31729906?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Mokhlesi B, Tulaimat A, Faibussowitsch I, et al. Obesity hypoventilation syndrome: prevalence and
predictors in patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep Breath. 2007 Jun;11(2):117-24. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17187265?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Sivam S, Yee B, Wong K, et al. Obesity hypoventilation syndrome: early detection of nocturnal-only
hypercapnia in an obese population. J Clin Sleep Med. 2018 Sep 15;14(9):1477-84.  Full text (https://
jcsm.aasm.org/doi/10.5664/jcsm.7318)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30176974?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74. Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia: ACOG practice bulletin, number 222. Obstet
Gynecol. 2020 Jun;135(6):e237-60. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32443079?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
75. Brown MA, Magee LA, Kenny LC, et al. The hypertensive disorders of pregnancy: ISSHP
classification, diagnosis & management recommendations for international practice. Pregnancy
Hypertens. 2018 Jul;13:291-310. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29803330?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. PLGF-based testing to help diagnose suspected
preterm pre-eclampsia. Jul 2022 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
dg49)
77. Duhig KE, Myers J, Seed PT, et al. Placental growth factor testing to assess women with suspected
pre-eclampsia: a multicentre, pragmatic, stepped-wedge cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2019 May 4;393(10183):1807-18.  Full text (https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/
PIIS0140-6736(18)33212-4/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30948284?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
78. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Hypertension in pregnancy: diagnosis and
management. Apr 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng133)
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Evaluation of hypertension References
79. Radbill B, Murphy B, LeRoith D. Rationale and strategies for early detection and management
of diabetic kidney disease. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008 Dec;83(12):1373-81. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19046557?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80. Adler JT, Meyer-Rochow GY, Chen H, et al. Pheochromocytoma: current approaches and
future directions. Oncologist. 2008 Jul;13(7):779-93. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18617683?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
81. Kudva YC, Sawka AM, Young WF Jr. Clinical review 164. The laboratory diagnosis of adrenal
pheochromocytoma: the Mayo Clinic experience. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Oct;88(10):4533-9.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14557417?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82. Laragh JH. Renin profiling for diagnosis, risk assessment, and treatment of hypertension.
Kidney Int. 1993 Nov;44(5):1163-75. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8264150?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Images
IMAGES
Images
Figure 1: Hypertensive retinopathy
From the collection of Sunil Nadar, MBBS, FRCP, FESC, FACC and Gregory Lip, MD, FRCP, FESC, FACC
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Disclaimer
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Evaluation of hypertension Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Sunil Nadar, MD, FRCP, CCT, FESC, FACC
Consultant Cardiologist
Dudley Group of hospitals NHS trust, Dudley, UK
DISCLOSURES: SN is an author of a number of references cited in this topic.
Gregory Y.H. Lip, MD, FRCP, DFM, FACC, FESC, FEHRA
Price-Evans Professor of Cardiovascular Medicine
University of Liverpool, Senior Investigator, National Institute for Health Research, UK, Distinguished
Professor, Faculty of Medicine, Aalborg University, Denmark, Adjunct Professor, Yonsei University, Seoul,
South Korea
DISCLOSURES: GYHL is a consultant and speaker for BMS/Pfizer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi-Sankyo,
and Anthos. No fees are received personally. GYHL is an author of a number of references cited in this
topic.
// Peer Reviewers:
Rod Jackson, MD, PhD
Professor of Epidemiology
Head of the Section of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, School of Population Health, University of Auckland,
Auckland, New Zealand
DISCLOSURES: RJ declares that he has no competing interests.
Alan Wilkinson, MD, FRCP
Professor of Medicine
David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
DISCLOSURES: AW declares that he has no competing interests. Unfortunately we have since been made
aware that Professor Wilkinson is deceased.
Michael Schachter, MB, BSc, FRCP
Department of Clinical Pharmacology
St Mary’s Hospital, Imperial College, London, UK
DISCLOSURES: MS declares that he has no competing interests.
