# Evaluation of hypotension

=== Page 1 ===
Evaluation of
hypotension
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Jan 29, 2025
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Theory  5
Etiology  5
Emergencies  8
Urgent considerations  8
Diagnosis  14
Approach  14
Differentials overview  26
Differentials  28
Online resources  57
Evidence tables  58
References  62
Images  72
Disclaimer  76
=== Page 3 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Overview
Summary
Hypotension is any blood pressure (BP) that is below the normal expected for an individual in a given
environment.
There is no single numerical cutoff universally accepted as representing hypotension. For example, while
systolic BP <90 mmHg may be considered hypotensive for someone with “normal BP” of 120 mmHg, many
healthy young adults will have a resting BP at or potentially below this level and will not be considered
hypotensive. As a result, it is difficult to estimate the prevalence.
Background history and accompanying clinical findings should be considered, bearing in mind that many
common illnesses present atypically in older adults, without characteristic symptoms such as pain.[1]
Hypotension can be the first sign of a serious acute illness (such as myocardial infarction, sepsis, or
gastrointestinal hemorrhage).[2]
Once acute causes have been excluded, other chronic or recurring causes should then be investigated.
Blood pressure measurement
It is essential to use an appropriate cuff size for BP measurements. Using a cuff that is too small (under-
cuffing) may cause overestimation of BP and may further mask a period of hypotension; while use of
a cuff that is too large (over-cuffing) can lead to falsely low BP readings with subsequent unwarranted
investigation.[3]
If the patient is not hypotensive at the time of assessment, lying and standing BP recordings should be
carried out in order to determine if orthostatic hypotension is present. The patient should rest supine for 5
minutes before lying BP measurement.[4] A systolic BP drop of 20 mmHg, or a diastolic BP drop of 10 mmHg
occurring within 3 minutes of orthostasis is considered significant.[5][6]
Most automatic sphygmomanometers overestimate BP in patients with atrial fibrillation, because they record
the highest systolic pressure rather than an average over several cardiac cycles. Palpate the patient’s pulse
to exclude arrhythmia before using an automatic sphygmomanometer.[5]
Pathophysiology
BP is determined by cardiac output (the product of heart rate and stroke volume) and total systemic vascular
resistance. Hypotension occurs when the cardiac output decreases and/or the systemic vascular resistance
decreases. Hypotension is usually due to:
• Decreased effective circulating volume (hypovolemia)
• Impaired cardiac output due to heart pump dysfunction (cardiogenic)
• Impaired cardiac output due to obstruction to cardiac filling (obstructive)
• Impaired peripheral vasoconstriction/distributive change.
In many cases, more than one mechanism is present (e.g., a patient with chronic heart failure who presents
with a gastrointestinal bleed may have evidence of both hypovolemia and reduced cardiac output).
Persistent hypotension can lead to shock, a state of reduced end-organ oxygenation owing to an imbalance
between tissue oxygen demand and delivery.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Overview
OVERVIEW
Initial management considerations
Liaison with nursing staff, with regard to maintenance of patient safety while investigations are underway,
is prudent. In particular, patients who are hypotensive in the setting of sepsis may have an accompanying
delirium increasing their risk of falls and injury.[7] [8] It is often difficult to exclude or confirm the presence
of shock without close monitoring of vital signs, including BP, heart rate, and urinary output. Therefore,
consideration should be given to the most appropriate setting required to monitor, nurse, and medically
manage the hypotensive patient.
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Theory
Etiology
The etiology of hypotension can be divided into 4 principal subtypes:
• Hypovolemic
• Cardiogenic
• Obstructive
• Impaired peripheral vasoconstriction and/or distributive.
There may be a combination of causes for hypotension in any individual patient. For example, a patient
with chronic liver disease who develops an upper gastrointestinal variceal bleed is likely to be at risk of
hypotension because of hypovolemia and impaired peripheral vasoconstriction. In addition, a low blood
pressure (BP) measurement may be part of a normal physiologic process (e.g., pregnancy).
Hypovolemic
Volume depletion causes a decrease in venous return to the heart, leading to a drop in cardiac output and,
subsequently, a lower mean arterial pressure. Neural and hormonal compensatory mechanisms may initially
maintain BP. If hypovolemia persists the patient develops orthostatic dizziness and tachycardia, followed by
hypotension even when supine, and finally hypotensive shock.[9] [10] [11]
Hypovolemic shock affects 30.8% of patients attending the emergency department with shock.[12]
Hypotension secondary to hypovolemia could be due to:
• Hemorrhage
• overt hemorrhage (e.g., many cases of gastrointestinal bleeding, trauma)
• concealed hemorrhage (e.g., aortic aneurysm rupture, retroperitoneal bleeding, ruptured ectopic
pregnancy).
• Nonhemorrhagic fluid depletion
• gastrointestinal losses (e.g., diarrhea, vomiting)
• renal causes (e.g., excess diuretic use, dialysis-induced hypotension)
• skin losses (e.g., massive sweating, burns)
• respiratory losses (e.g., draining pleural effusions)
• third-space sequestration (e.g., ascites).
Clinical signs of volume depletion are a result of the hemodynamic effects of the reduction in intravascular
volume. Dehydration (loss of water) is associated with increased thirst, progressing when more severe to
altered mental state and coma. Other signs of dehydration include dry mucous membranes and lack of
axillary moisture. Dehydration and volume depletion are discrete entities, but may be present together at the
same time.
Cardiogenic
Hypotension results from heart pump dysfunction (more commonly left-sided), causing a decrease in cardiac
output in the setting of increased preload. The compensatory surges in catecholamines normally lead to
increased systemic vascular resistance, maintaining BP.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Theory
THEORY
However, in some instances (especially acute coronary syndrome), systemic vascular resistance decreases
and hypotension develops.[13]
Causes include:
• Acute coronary syndrome
• Acute heart failure
• Cardiac valvular lesions
• Cardiac dysrhythmia.
The hypotension associated with carotid sinus syndrome (cardio-inhibitory subtype) is also cardiogenic in
origin. It occurs when a bradyarrhythmia is provoked by carotid sinus massage.
Cardiogenic shock accounts for 14% of cases of shock presenting to the emergency department.[12]
Obstructive
Cardiac output can be reduced, and lead to hypotension even when cardiac pump function is normal. This
can occur if there is obstruction to cardiac filling (e.g., with cardiac tamponade or tension pneumothorax)
or obstruction to blood flow between the heart and lungs (e.g., with pulmonary embolism).[14] In such
conditions, cardiac output falls despite systemic vascular resistance increases and normal volume status.
Obstructive shock is uncommon, affecting 1% of patients attending the emergency department with
shock.[12]
Impaired peripheral vasoconstriction and distributive change
Regulation of BP involves ongoing input from several systems, most importantly from circulating
catecholamines and the alpha-1-adrenergic receptor system in arterioles. Hypotension in the presence of
euvolemia and normal cardiac output can arise if the homeostatic mechanisms that maintain vasoconstriction
are impaired.
In some conditions (e.g., sepsis and anaphylaxis), impaired peripheral vasoconstriction is combined with loss
of fluid to extravascular space (distributive change). Leakage of fluid from blood vessels to the extravascular
space, due to increased vascular permeability, is brought about by the release of inflammatory cytokines.
Causes of hypotension due to impaired peripheral vasoconstriction and/or distributive change include:
• Sepsis
• Anaphylaxis
• Severe acute pancreatitis (distributive change due to a systemic inflammatory response)[15]
• Disorders directly affecting functioning of the autonomic nervous system:
• Chronic illnesses (e.g., diabetes mellitus, Parkinson disease and multisystem atrophy, primary
autonomic failure, Addison disease, hypopituitarism, amyloidosis)
• Acute illnesses (e.g., following acute stroke).
• Accumulation of metabolites that influence the blood vessel function (e.g., chronic liver disease).
• Medications (e.g., alpha blockers, nitrates).
• Syncope: this is a term used to describe a transient loss of consciousness and postural tone resulting
from global cerebral hypoperfusion with spontaneous and complete recovery, and no neurological
sequelae. Neurally mediated syncope refers to a heterogenous group of conditions in which there is a
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Theory
relatively sudden change in autonomic nervous system activity leading to a fall in BP, heart rate, and
cerebral perfusion. It is typically preceded by prodromal symptoms of pallor, diaphoresis, nausea, and
features of cerebral and retinal hypoperfusion, such as visual and auditory disturbances and cognitive
slowing. Neurally mediated syncope incorporates vasovagal syncope, situational syncope (syncope
occurring in specific situations; e.g., coughing, micturition, or with emotional stimuli), and carotid sinus
syndrome.[6] [16]
• Nutritional deficiency states that produce autonomic and peripheral neuropathy (e.g., thiamine
deficiency, vitamin B12 deficiency).
• Exercise-associated collapse in endurance athletes due to lower extremity pooling of blood when
exercise ceases.[17]
In a Danish cohort study of patients attending the emergency department with shock, 27.2% had distributive
septic shock and 23.4% had distributive non-septic shock.[12]
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
Urgent considerations
(See  Differentials  for more details)
Some of the conditions causing hypotension may present with shock, requiring urgent lifesaving treatment.
Shock is the life-threatening failure of adequate oxygen delivery to the tissues, due to decreased blood
supply or increased demand, resulting in decreased end-organ oxygenation. If left untreated, shock results in
end-organ damage and death. Tissue hypoperfusion may occur without hypotension but, in clinical practice,
shock is commonly diagnosed when both arterial hypotension and organ dysfunction are present.[18]
Tachycardia, altered cognition or a reduced level of consciousness, diaphoresis, and oliguria are all pointers
to the presence of shock.
Airway, breathing, and circulation (ABC) measures are first priority in all critically ill patients. Stabilization of
airway and breathing is a priority, followed by restoration of circulating volume and perfusion of peripheral
tissues.
Administration of supplemental oxygen with continuous pulse oximetry may be adequate to maintain oxygen
saturation. In more severe cases, intubation and ventilation may be required. Start supplemental oxygen
therapy through a reservoir mask with a flow rate of 15 L/min for critically ill patients, until reliable pulse
oximetry readings are available. Further oxygen therapy should be guided by pulse oximetry, keeping oxygen
saturation between 94% and 98%. Patients at risk of hypercapnia may need controlled oxygen therapy to
maintain oxygen saturation between 88% and 92%.[19]
Early and frequent monitoring of blood pressure is an important part of perfusion assessment, and an initial
fluid bolus should be administered to patients with evidence of intravascular hypovolemia.
All patients require an ECG and, in more severe cases, continuous cardiac monitoring may be indicated.
Specific urgent measures are required in specific conditions, listed below.
Hypovolemic shock
Severe dehydration, due to nonhemorrhagic losses (e.g., severe diarrhea and vomiting):
• Urgent ABC assessment and support is required. In most cases, intravenous isotonic saline is the
initial fluid used.
• Monitoring by clinical exam of volume status, BP and central venous pressure (CVP) measurement,
combined with close monitoring of electrolytes and renal parameters are important.[9] Aggressive fluid
administration is guided by achievement of normal CVP (8-12 cm H2O).
• Particular care concerning the rate of fluid replacement is required in older adults and in patients with a
history of cardiac failure.
Hemorrhage (e.g., due to gastrointestinal bleed, retroperitoneal bleed, ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm,
ruptured ectopic pregnancy, trauma):
• Urgent ABC assessment and support is required. If bleeding is severe, it is typically appropriate
to mobilize a multidisciplinary team, including emergency medicine physicians, surgeons, and
radiologists.
• Intravenous saline is administered initially, and often continued following commencement of blood
transfusion.
• Blood transfusion is an immediate priority. In the setting of acute large hemorrhage, transfusion of
2 to 4 units is often necessary. The presence of ongoing tachycardia, hypotension, and other signs
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Emergencies
of shock, or lack of serum hemoglobin response to blood transfusion, are all markers of ongoing
internal or occult hemorrhage. Clinical response, pulse, BP, CVP, renal output, complete blood count,
coagulation, and electrolytes should be closely monitored. Results from one multicenter cohort study
suggested that a systolic BP <110 mmHg is a marker of poor outcomes and higher mortality in blunt
trauma patients.[20] Trauma specialists suggest aiming for controlled hypotension (systolic <90
mmHg) in penetrating trauma.
• Fresh frozen plasma or coagulation factor concentrates are often necessary when coagulopathy
is known or suspected to be present (refer to local hospital guidelines).[21] [22] [23] Patients on
therapeutic anticoagulation should have reversal of anticoagulation, in line with local hospital
guidelines. This may include administration of intravenous vitamin K and prothrombin complex
concentrate for reversal of anticoagulation with warfarin, protamine for reversal of anticoagulation with
heparin, or specific reversal agents for direct oral anticoagulants where available.[24] This may be
required following massive transfusion or in patients with upper gastrointestinal bleeding secondary to
chronic liver disease.
• Antifibrinolytics (such as tranexamic acid) should be considered in all patients as soon as possible
with acute severe hemorrhage as they have been shown to increase survival. Among patients with
postpartum or traumatic bleeding, immediate treatment with tranexamic acid was found to greatly
increase the odds of survival, with the survival benefit decreasing by about 10% for every 15 minutes
of treatment delay until 3 hours, after which there was no benefit.[25]
• Definitive action to correct the source of hemorrhage is usually only possible when the patient's
condition has been stabilized.
• Upper or lower gastrointestinal endoscopies should follow initial efforts to stabilize the patient, if
gastrointestinal hemorrhage is suspected.
• In cases of trauma, intra-abdominal or retroperitoneal bleeding, computed tomography scanning,
followed by laparotomy or other surgical intervention may be necessary.
• In the cases of suspected ruptured ectopic pregnancy or bleeding aortic aneurysm, fluid and blood
resuscitation is required, and the patient should be transferred immediately to the operating room.
A bedside ultrasound is a reasonable and simple test, if it does not delay emergency transfer to the
operating room for a hemodynamically unstable patient. The type of surgery performed will depend on
the experience and judgment of the surgeon.
Acute coronary syndrome or acute heart failure
• Urgent ABC assessment and support is required.
• Additional findings may include chest pain, dyspnea, dysrhythmias, elevated jugular venous pressure,
and crackles at lung bases.
• Initial management of a patient with an ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) involves
administration of analgesia and antiplatelet agents. Supplemental oxygen is only needed if the patient
is hypoxemic (peripheral oxygen saturations <94%).[19] Liberal oxygen therapy increases mortality in
acutely ill adults without improving other outcomes.[26]
• Definitive management of STEMI includes revascularization and anticoagulation, ideally by primary
angioplasty.[27] Percutaneous coronary intervention should be performed within 90 minutes of first
presentation, or thrombolysis administered within 12 hours of symptom onset.[27] 
• In patients with evidence of an inferior myocardial infarction on ECG, an initial fluid bolus should be
administered if there is evidence of low cardiac output and no pulmonary edema.
• If acute coronary syndrome is associated with hypotension, it may indicate cardiac pump dysfunction
(cardiogenic shock) and antihypertensive medications should be stopped.
EMERGENCIES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
• After the patient has been stabilized, acute heart failure may necessitate intensive care unit (ICU)
transfer for possible ventilation, inotrope administration, and vasodilators such as nitroglycerin,
nitroprusside, and diuretics.[28]
Pulmonary embolism
• Hypoxemia, combined with a systolic BP <90 mmHg, is suggestive of a massive embolism associated
with a high mortality. Clinical symptoms and signs may include pleuritic chest pain, hemoptysis, signs
of acute respiratory distress, cyanosis, and pleural rub. The absence of pleuritic pain or hemoptysis
should not deter from investigating for a pulmonary embolism (PE) if hypotension is present. PE is
common and frequently presents without classical symptoms.[29]
• Urgent ABC assessment and support is required. Admission to ICU, oxygen if the patient is
hypoxemic, intravenous fluids, vasopressors, and anticoagulation are necessary. However, aggressive
fluid support should be avoided as this may worsen right ventricle overload/strain. Administration of
intravenous thrombolysis may be required.
• Urgent surgical embolectomy may be performed instead of thrombolytic therapy in people who have a
high risk of bleeding or where there is insufficient time for effective systemic thrombolytic therapy and
when thrombolysis fails.
Dysrhythmia
• Urgent ABC assessment and support is required.
Tachycardia:
• Patients with shock (whether with ventricular tachycardia or supraventricular tachycardia) need
intravenous sedation, oxygen saturation monitoring, airway management, and immediate direct-
current cardioversion in a coronary care unit or other equivalent setting. Current cardiovascular care
guidelines should be followed.[30] [31]
• Intravenous anti-arrhythmic agents (often by infusion) and close monitoring of electrolytes, particularly
potassium and magnesium, will be necessary.
• If any underlying cause is identified, this should be treated (e.g., thyrotoxicosis).
• Subsequent use of anti-arrhythmic medication and consideration of cardioverter-defibrillator insertion
will be guided by a specialist cardiologist.
Bradycardia:
• Patients who are hemodynamically unstable should be considered for immediate temporary
pacing.[30]
• This can be provided by external electrodes or by insertion of a transjugular venous wire in order to
directly pace the right ventricle. Temporary pacing with external electrodes induces muscle contraction
which can be painful. This should only be used as a temporary measure until transvenous pacing can
be achieved.
• Decisions about further management (e.g., need for permanent pacemaker insertion) can be made in
conjunction with a cardiologist.
• If any underlying cause is identified, this should be treated (e.g., hypothermia).
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Emergencies
Tension pneumothorax
• Clinical symptoms and signs include signs of acute respiratory distress, shift of the trachea from the
midline, and absent breath sounds over one lung.
• Supplemental oxygen and urgent chest decompression are required. A 14-gauge intravenous catheter
or needle thoracostomy device should be inserted into the pleural space. Sites for decompression of
a tension pneumothorax in adults are: second intercostal space, midclavicular line; fourth intercostal
space, between the anterior axillary and midaxillary line; and fifth intercostal space, between the
anterior axillary and midaxillary line.[32] A confirmatory hiss of expelled air should be noted. Urgent
decompression should not be delayed by awaiting chest x-ray confirmation of the diagnosis.
• Subsequent chest drain insertion and chest x-ray should be carried out.
Cardiac tamponade
• Clinical symptoms and signs include chest pain that is relieved on sitting forward, dyspnea,
tachycardia, reduced heart sounds, distended jugular veins, and pulsus paradoxus.
• Urgent resuscitation (ABC) with supplemental oxygen, and fluid or blood replacement if there is
hypovolemia, is required.
• Emergency drainage of a pericardial effusion that is causing tamponade is a life-saving procedure.
• Pericardiocentesis can be performed without imaging guidance or with the aid of echocardiography or
fluoroscopy, with or without hemodynamic monitoring.
• Surgical drainage is indicated if there is a hemopericardium, purulent effusion, trauma or associated
neoplastic disease.
• A chest x-ray should be carried out in order to ensure a pneumothorax has not occurred as a result of
the procedure.
Septic shock
Sepsis is a spectrum of disease, where there is a systemic and dysregulated host response to an
infection.[36] Presentation ranges from subtle, nonspecific symptoms (e.g., feeling unwell with a normal
temperature) to severe symptoms with evidence of multiorgan dysfunction and septic shock. Patients may
have signs of tachycardia, tachypnea, hypotension, fever or hypothermia, poor capillary refill, mottled or
ashen skin, cyanosis, newly altered mental state or reduced urine output.[37] Sepsis and septic shock are
medical emergencies.
Risk factors for sepsis include: age under 1 year, age over 75 years, frailty, impaired immunity (due to illness
or drugs), recent surgery or other invasive procedures, any breach of skin integrity (e.g., cuts or burns),
intravenous drug misuse, indwelling lines or catheters, and pregnancy or recent pregnancy.[37]
Early recognition of sepsis is essential because early treatment improves outcomes.[37] [38][Evidence C]
[Evidence C] There is an inverse linear correlation between systolic blood pressure and mortality in older
people admitted to hospital with suspected infection.[39] However, detection can be challenging because
the clinical presentation of sepsis can be subtle and nonspecific. A low threshold for suspecting sepsis is
therefore important. The key to early recognition is the systematic identification of any patient who has signs
or symptoms suggestive of infection and is at risk of deterioration due to organ dysfunction. Several risk
stratification approaches have been proposed. All rely on a structured clinical assessment and recording
of the patient’s vital signs.[37] [40][41][42] [43] It is important to check local guidance for information on
which approach your institution recommends. The timeline of ensuing investigations and treatment should be
guided by this early assessment.[42]
EMERGENCIES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
Treatment guidelines have been produced by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign and remain the most widely
accepted standards.[38][44] Recommended treatment of patients with suspected sepsis is:
• Measure lactate level, and remeasure lactate if initial lactate is elevated (>18 mg/dL [>2 mmol/L])
• Obtain blood cultures before administering antibiotics
• Administer broad-spectrum antibiotics (with methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  [MRSA]
coverage if there is high risk of MRSA) for adults with possible septic shock or a high likelihood for
sepsis
• For adults with sepsis or septic shock at high risk of fungal infection, empiric antifungal therapy should
be administered
• Begin rapid administration of crystalloid fluids for hypotension or lactate level ≥36 mg/dL (≥4 mmol/L).
Consult local protocols.
• Administer vasopressors peripherally if hypotensive during or after fluid resuscitation to maintain mean
arterial pressure ≥65 mmHg, rather than delaying initiation until central venous access is secured.
Norepinephrine (noradrenaline) is the vasopressor of choice
• For adults with sepsis-induced hypoxemic respiratory failure, high flow nasal oxygen should be given.
Ideally these interventions should all begin in the first hour after sepsis recognition.[44] For adults with
possible sepsis without shock, if concern for infection persists, antibiotics should be given within three hours
from the time when sepsis was first recognized.[38] For adults with a low likelihood of infection and without
shock, antibiotics can be deferred while continuing to closely monitor the patient.[38]
For more information on sepsis, please see Sepsis in adults  and Sepsis in children .
Anaphylactic shock
• There may be a history of exposure to new foods, drugs, blood transfusions, rashes, bites, or stings.
• Features may include: bronchospasm, skin rash, inspiratory stridor, anxiety, nausea, and vomiting.
• Intramuscular epinephrine (adrenaline), urgent airway control and supportive therapy should be
provided immediately.[30][45] [46]
• Intramuscular epinephrine can be repeated according to local protocols.
• Antihistamines, inhaled beta-adrenergic agents, and intravenous corticosteroids may be considered in
cardiac arrest due to anaphylaxis, although there is no evidence that supports the routine use of either
steroids or antihistamines in initial resuscitation. Antihistamines and intravenous corticosteroids do not
appear to alter the progress of anaphylaxis or prevent biphasic anaphylaxis.[30][46]
• All potentially offending agents should be stopped.
Neurogenic hypotension
• Should be suspected when hypotension occurs after spinal anesthesia, or in a patient with recent
trauma to the spine or brain. It is associated with bradycardia, neurological dysfunction, and the
presence of warm, dry skin.
• If spinal trauma is suspected, the patient's spine should be immobilized safely, using a spinal board
and cervical spine immobilization. Referral to trauma team management is recommended in these
patients.
• Immediate management priorities are supportive care (including central line placement, volume
resuscitation and vasopressors) and imaging of the brain or spinal cord if physical injury is suspected.
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Emergencies
Addisonian (adrenal) crisis
• The patient may or may not have a known history of adrenal insufficiency. Patients taking chronic
glucocorticoids may have secondary adrenal suppression and are also at risk of adrenal crisis if the
glucocorticoids are suddenly withdrawn. During times of illness, trauma, or infection, the dose of
glucocorticoids needs to be increased.
• Intravenous saline should be administered immediately, pending a definitive diagnosis. It is usually
necessary to administer 1 liter rapidly, followed by a subsequent 2 to 4 liters over 24 hours.
• Urgent administration of glucocorticoid, either with intravenous hydrocortisone or with intravenous
dexamethasone sodium phosphate is usually necessary for 1 to 3 days.[47]
• If hypoglycemia is present, administration of intravenous glucose or intravenous saline, supplemented
with glucose may be necessary.
• Once the patient is more stable, the underlying cause of the crises should be investigated further.
EMERGENCIES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Approach
The initial decision that the clinician must address is whether or not the patient is in shock.
Patients with hypotension may present in various clinical states, ranging from critically ill with shock, to
asymptomatic. A normal blood pressure (BP) does not necessarily mean normal perfusion, as adequate
pressure does not equate to adequate cardiac output.[48] Therefore, thorough examination for other signs of
inadequate perfusion and monitoring is important.
If BP is unrecordable and assessment finds the patient unresponsive with no palpable pulse, the
clinician should proceed to resuscitation, if appropriate, in accordance with resuscitation guidelines.[30]
  [Resuscitation Council (UK): 2021 resuscitation guidelines] (https://www.resus.org.uk/library/2021-
resuscitation-guidelines)
When there is no evidence of shock, the clinician must assess if the hypotension is an acute change
from previous status and if there is clinical evidence of a precipitating event (e.g., myocardial infarction,
gastrointestinal bleed, pulmonary embolism). If the presentation is chronic or recurring, a chronic illness that
may explain the patient's hypotension should be identified.
The patient's risk of falling should be assessed by a multi-disciplinary team (nursing, physical therapy,
occupational therapy). This is particularly important in patients known to have a chronic illness predisposing
them to hypotension, such as diabetes mellitus, Addison disease or parkinsonism.
Summary of assessment in a hypotensive adult
Created by The BMJ Group
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Blood pressure measurement
Hypotension is defined as any BP that is below the normal expected for an individual in a given environment.
There is no single numerical cutoff universally accepted as representing hypotension. It is essential to use
an appropriate cuff size for BP measurements. Using a cuff that is too small (under-cuffing) may cause
overestimation of BP and may further mask a period of hypotension; while use of a cuff that is too large
(over-cuffing) can lead to falsely low BP readings with subsequent unwarranted investigation.[3] The patient
should be seated comfortably for five minutes before BP measurement. The BP cuff should be at the level
of the heart, with the lower edge of the cuff a few centimeters above the antecubital fossa. The patient’s arm
and back should be supported, and legs unfolded.[5]
It is helpful to know previous BP measurements for comparison.
If the patient is not hypotensive at the time of assessment, lying and standing BP recordings should be
carried out in order to determine if orthostatic hypotension is present. The patient should rest supine for 5
minutes before lying BP measurement.[4] A systolic BP drop of 20 mmHg, or a diastolic BP drop of 10 mmHg
occurring within 3 minutes of orthostasis is considered significant.[5] [6]
Most automatic sphygmomanometers overestimate blood pressure in patients with atrial fibrillation, because
they record the highest systolic pressure rather than an average over several cardiac cycles. Palpate the
patient’s pulse to exclude arrhythmia before using an automatic sphygmomanometer.[5]
Determining the presence of shock
Patients are acutely ill and require urgent lifesaving intervention.
History should be a brief assessment, concurrent with airway, breathing, and circulation (ABC) resuscitation
and supportive care. Establishing if the patient is alert and oriented by asking some general questions to
assess his or her cognition is a reasonable first step. If the patient is unresponsive and hypotensive, the
presence of shock should be assumed until shown otherwise.
Pointers toward specific causes include:
• early pregnancy (may be ruptured ectopic pregnancy)
• cardiac disease (may be cardiogenic shock due to various causes)
• chronic liver disease (gastrointestinal bleed)
• exposure to a known allergen (anaphylaxis)
• risk factors for thrombosis (PE)
• recent infection or known immunodeficiency (sepsis)
• trauma (hemorrhage due to long bone fracture or other injuries)
• presence of aortic aneurysm
• endocrine disorder (Addisonian crisis, severe hypothyroidism).
Accurate recording of vital signs (heart rate, BP, urine output, temperature) and determination of level of
consciousness is essential.
Tachycardia, altered cognition or reduced level of consciousness, diaphoresis, and oliguria are all pointers
to the presence of shock. Indicators of regional perfusion (e.g., urine output, change in mental status, and
respiratory rate) are important because early hemodynamic assessment based on vital signs and central
venous pressure (CVP) may fail to detect persistent global hypoxia.[49]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
General inspection should include assessment of whether or not the patient appears clammy or whether
peripheries are warm. If possible, a quick review of systems should be completed so that any precipitant
present can be identified. Specific signs indicating the precipitating cause include:
• Dry mucous membranes, lack of axillary moisture, decreased skin turgor, diarrhea, vomiting, rigorous
exercise, exposure to prolonged or excessive heat (dehydration).
• Acute hemorrhage may either be externally apparent (some types of trauma).
• Suspected hemorrhage: gastrointestinal bleeding (abdominal tenderness, pallor, melena or fresh
bleeding on rectal examination), ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm (abdominal tenderness,
presence of abdominal pulsatile mass, gradual loss of consciousness and weak peripheral pulses),
retroperitoneal bleed (abdominal tenderness, possible bruising in the flanks), ruptured ectopic
pregnancy (abdominal tenderness and guarding, decreased bowel sounds, cervical motion
tenderness, and vaginal bleeding in the presence of a positive pregnancy test).
• Diaphoretic appearance, pallor, tachycardia, bradycardia, or new abnormal pulse rhythm, distended
jugular veins, dyspnea, crackles at lung bases, and new heart murmur may occur in cardiogenic shock
(e.g., due to acute coronary syndrome or acute heart failure). Pulse may be abnormal in patients with
acute cardiac dysrhythmias.
• Distended jugular veins, reduced heart sounds and hypotension (Beck triad), along with increased
respiratory rate, tachycardia, and pulsus paradoxus indicate cardiac tamponade.
• Cyanosis, profuse diaphoresis, absent unilateral breath sounds, hyperresonance to percussion over
one lung, tracheal shift from midline are classic signs of a tension pneumothorax.
• Tachypnea, pleural rub on chest auscultation, low oxygen saturations, and possible calf tenderness
may be present in the case of a large acute PE.
• Elevated or low temperature, altered mental status, with or without focal signs of infection, occur
with sepsis. However, sepsis should be considered if a patient presents with signs or symptoms that
indicate possible infection, regardless of temperature.[37] Sepsis may present initially with nonspecific,
nonlocalized symptoms, such as feeling unwell with normal temperature.
• Bronchospasm, rash, angioedema of the tongue, lips, or eyelids, flushing; rhinitis, inspiratory stridor,
syncope are signs in anaphylaxis.
• Sudden collapse due to Addisonian crisis may be difficult to diagnose unless suspected from
the history and typical patient features (e.g., hyperpigmentation). Adrenal suppression should be
considered in patients taking chronic glucocorticoids who have not received stress doses of steroids
during an intercurrent illness, or who have had chronic steroids abruptly withdrawn.
• Severe hypothyroidism may progress to signs of cardiogenic shock and coma. There may be
hypothermia, bradycardia, and signs of chronic hypothyroid disease including coarse hair, facial
edema, eyelid edema, and thick tongue.
Determining the type of shock
Unless immediately clear, it may be necessary to determine the relative contributions of volume depletion,
reduced cardiac pump function, and impaired peripheral vasoconstriction in order to select the most
appropriate treatment interventions.
First assess whether the patient responds to fluids. A good response indicates a decreased preload.
Fluid responsiveness can be assessed by:
• Passive leg raising:
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
• The patient's legs are raised to 45 degrees. The transfer of blood from the legs and abdomen
increases venous return. An increase in cardiac output of 10% or more is considered a positive
test. A positive passive leg raise test has a sensitivity of 85% and a specificity of 91% for fluid
challenge responsiveness.[50]
• Bolus of intravenous fluids:
• Helps determine if the patient has a decreased preload. Typically, an increase in stroke volume
of 10% to 12%, with a fluid bolus of 300 mL to 500 mL of crystalloids, is taken as a positive
response.[51]
• Ultrasonography:
• The SHoC (Sonography in Hypotension and Cardiac arrest) consensus statement outlines a
recommended point-of-care ultrasound protocol to help identify a cause of hypotension. This
includes: cardiac views to assess for pericardial fluid, ventricle size, shape and contractility,
valve opening and signs of right heart strain; lung views to look for pulmonary edema,
consolidation, pneumothorax and pleural fluid; and inferior vena cava (IVC) views to assess
diameter and variation in size with respiration. A large diameter IVC with little variability indicates
high right heart filling pressures, while a small diameter IVC with more respiratory variation
indicates hypovolemia which could respond to fluid resuscitation.[52] However, a more recent
randomized controlled trial did not identify a survival benefit for point-of-care ultrasonography for
undifferentiated hypotension in the emergency department.[53] The most common diagnosis, in
more than half of the patients, was occult sepsis.
• Echocardiography:
• Provides information on pulmonary artery pressure. More readily available and less invasive
than pulmonary artery catheterization.
• Pulmonary artery catheterization:
• insertion allows for measurement of pulmonary artery occlusion pressure and is the test of
choice for assessment and monitoring. A range of 12 to 18 mmHg is associated with adequate
filling. It is variably affected by the presence of many conditions (e.g., mechanical ventilation,
use of positive end expiratory pressure ventilation, increased abdominal pressure, decreased
left ventricular function, or pericardial compliance). A pulmonary artery catheter is particularly
useful in cardiogenic shock as it provides a route for direct measurement of cardiac output.
Cardiogenic shock is suggested by an elevated pulmonary artery occlusion pressure with levels
>18 mmHg to 20 mmHg and low preload states are usually associated with reduced pulmonary
artery occlusion pressure levels of <10 mmHg.
If the patient is fluid responsive, assess whether the arterial tone (afterload) is increased or decreased and
whether pump function (cardiac contractility) is increased or decreased.
Measures for assessment include:
• Cardiac output (CO) can be calculated in various ways (e.g., by dilution and thermodilution using a
pulmonary artery catheter, Doppler ultrasound, and measurements of pulse pressure).
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
• Pulse pressure is the difference between systolic and diastolic blood pressure. Pulse pressure is
narrow when it is <25% of systolic pressure. Narrowed pulse pressure may indicate decreased cardiac
output due to decreased circulating volume, acute heart failure or cardiac tamponade. In patients
with a penetrating traumatic injury, narrowed pulse pressure is associated with the presence of
hemorrhagic shock, need for massive transfusion and need for emergent surgery.[54]
• The cardiac index is helpful in quantifying the relative contributions of impaired peripheral
vasoconstriction and reduced cardiac pump function to shock. The cardiac index is the ratio of the CO
to body surface area in meters squared with normal values ranging between 2.5 to 4.0 L/min/m². In
cardiogenic shock, the cardiac index is typically <1.8 L/min/m² without inotropes, and <2.0 to 2.2 L/
min/m² with inotropes.[55]
• Systemic vascular resistance (SVR) can be calculated as a measure of afterload as follows: SVR =
mean arterial pressure - CVP/CO × 80. The ratio to the body surface area is called the SVR Index and
ranges from 1800 to 2800.
There are various indicators of the level of tissue perfusion, including serum lactate levels. Levels ≥4 mmol/
L are associated with greater mortality in shock. Base excess levels can be misleading and are generally not
used.
Acute hypotension without shock
The history should include:
• A general inquiry about the presence of fever/chills should be made (sepsis).
• Cardiovascular history should concentrate on the presence or absence of chest pain (myocardial
infarction, PE), palpitations (dysrhythmia), and dyspnea (acute heart failure, PE).
• Respiratory history should concentrate on the presence of dyspnea (PE, acute heart failure),
hemoptysis (PE, pneumonia/sepsis or acute heart failure), and pleuritic pain (PE, pneumonia/sepsis).
• Abdominal/gastrointestinal history should focus on the presence of abdominal pain (peptic ulcer
disease causing gastrointestinal bleed, abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture, or diverticular disease
causing lower gastrointestinal bleed), hematemesis (upper gastrointestinal bleed), hematochezia, and
symptoms of vomiting and diarrhea (gastroenteritis).
• Genitourinary history should include a search for symptoms of urosepsis and hematuria.
• Of note, many of the common precipitants of acute hypotension present atypically in older
adults.[1] Examples of such illnesses include myocardial infarction, peptic ulcer disease, PE, and
pneumothorax.[2] [29][56][57]
• The presence of a previous stroke predisposing to hypotension is usually apparent from the patient's
recent history as hypotension post-stroke typically occurs in the first few days following acute stroke.
Past medical history
• The patient's past medical history should be noted in order to determine if he or she has any condition
that may predispose the patient to acute hypotension (e.g., known peptic ulcer disease, ischemic heart
disease, chronic liver disease, diabetes mellitus, previous deep vein thrombosis or PE).
• If the patient is dependent on renal replacement therapy (dialysis), the presence of dialysis-induced
hypotension should be considered. A meta-analysis found that the incidence of dialysis-induced
hypotension is 12%. Diabetes, large interdialytic weight gain, female sex and low body weight are risk
factors for dialysis-induced hypotension.[58]
Medication history
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
• Medication-related hypotension is the most common cause of acute hypotension with no previous
history of hypotensive events, particularly in older patients.[59] Cardiovascular medications, older
antidepressants, and psychotropics are most commonly implicated.[60] Medication may be one of
several interacting factors in older patients (e.g., antihypertensive and/or vasodilatory medication,
dehydration, and illness-associated impaired vasoconstriction). Administration of intravenous
acetaminophen can cause a drop in blood pressure in critically ill hospitalized patients.[61] Temporary
suspension of implicated medication with gradual reintroduction is often required. In the longer term,
removal of medication must be considered individually for each patient and must be weighed against
the potential benefits of specific agents. Taking an accurate medication history is also important
because some medications increase the risk of certain differentials (e.g., younger women taking the
oral contraceptive pill have a higher risk for PE).
• The presence of any previously recorded allergy or episodes of anaphylaxis should be noted.
Social history
• The patient's social history should include details of smoking (peptic ulcer disease, PE, myocardial
infarction), alcohol use (peptic ulcer disease, chronic liver disease), or any illegal drug use (e.g.,
cocaine usage predisposes to dysrhythmias and acute coronary syndromes).
ECG demonstrating episode of paroxysmal atrial tachycardia
in a 35-year-old with history of recent cocaine use
From the collection of Sarah Stahmer, MD, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC; used with permission
Examination
• General inspection should include assessment of whether the patient appears comfortable at rest or
appears to be distressed (e.g., tension pneumothorax). An elevated respiratory rate may point to the
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
presence of an acute cardiac or respiratory problem (e.g., acute heart failure), but can also be present
if the patient is acidotic (e.g., sepsis).
• Head and neck exams should note the presence of jaundice (chronic liver disease/gastrointestinal
bleed/sepsis), cyanosis (acute heart failure), trachea position (displaced by tension pneumothorax),
distended jugular veins (acute heart failure, tamponade).
• Consideration of the patient's volume status/hydration may be made by examining skin turgor and
mucous membranes. The presence of any signs of chronic liver disease may point to the presence of
gastrointestinal bleeding or sepsis. Evidence of cellulitis (sepsis) should be excluded on examination of
the upper and lower limbs. Increased pigmentation is a sign frequently noted in patients with Addison
disease and chronic renal failure.
• Cardiovascular exams should include evaluation of the volume of heart sounds (muffled/reduced in
cardiac tamponade, often loud if tachycardia present due to sepsis), the presence of any new murmur
(acute heart failure due to cardiac valvular dysfunction, as may occur post-myocardial infarction or
with endocarditis), and the presence of additional heart sounds (heart failure). Patients with right
heart failure may present with compartmental dehydration (i.e., present with ankle edema but have
simultaneous intravascular depletion).
• Respiratory exams may reveal crackles at the lung base (acute heart failure), absent or reduced air
entry with hyperresonant note to percussion (pneumothorax), or consolidation signs (pneumonia/
sepsis). Bibasilar crackles may be a manifestation of chronic lung disease. Occasionally, a pleural rub
may be heard to indicate the presence of a PE, although a normal respiratory examination does not
exclude the presence of one.
• Abdominal exams should include evaluation of upper abdominal tenderness (peptic ulcer disease/
upper gastrointestinal bleed), a check for the presence of a pulsatile mass (abdominal aortic
aneurysm), left lower quadrant tenderness (lower gastrointestinal bleed), and an evaluation of
any signs that may indicate the presence of chronic liver disease (caput meduse, telangiectasia,
splenomegaly). If a pulsatile mass is felt, it is important to check for reduced femoral pulses that
are suggestive of bleeding abdominal aortic aneurysm. A rectal exam should be performed if
gastrointestinal bleeding is suspected.
• Focal neurological signs may be present if hypotension is occurring post-stroke. In many cases, this
may result from injudicious introduction of antihypertensive medication. The patient should be kept
supine for 24 hours and any hypotension predisposing medication withheld.
Investigations
The following investigations should be performed in all patients with acute hypotension, including patients
with shock where the diagnosis may not be clear:
• CBC (a low hemoglobin may or may not be present with hemorrhage, an elevated WBC count may be
indicative of infection or inflammation)
• Serum electrolytes and blood glucose
• Serum liver aminotransferases and bilirubin
• Serum troponin
• D-dimer (may be normal or elevated with PE)
• Coagulation profile
• 12-lead ECG (may be followed by cardiac telemetry and 24-hr ECG in patients with suspected
dysrhythmia)
• Pulse oximetry recording
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
• Thyroid function tests (thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH] and free T4) may also be considered in older
adults.
Further investigations are directed towards identifying the cause of the hypotension and monitoring the
patient’s response to initial treatment. Investigations may include:
• Arterial blood gas measurements may be useful in patients with sepsis, suspected dehydration, and
PE.
• Serum lactate measurements to monitor response to resuscitation in septic shock.
• In all cases where bleeding is suspected, sending a blood sample for group and save is prudent.
• Pregnancy testing is valuable and may help to confirm a pregnancy-related cause such as ectopic
pregnancy.
• Inflammatory markers may be raised in sepsis or an inflammatory cause of cardiac tamponade.
• Microbiological cultures from the site of suspected sepsis, e.g., mid-stream urine culture, lumbar
puncture, sputum culture and blood cultures.
• Chest x-ray: may demonstrate pneumonia as a source of sepsis. Performed in cases of suspected PE
(although frequently normal), cardiac tamponade, acute coronary syndrome and acute heart failure.
Chest x-ray should also be performed after, but not before, emergency chest decompression for
tension pneumothorax.
• Echocardiogram: may be performed in cases of acute heart failure, cardiac tamponade, sepsis and
acute coronary syndrome.
• Coronary angiogram may also be performed in people with acute coronary syndrome.
• B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) may help to confirm suspected acute heart failure. In acute settings,
levels of natriuretic peptide biomarkers such as BNP may be more useful for ruling out than ruling in
a diagnosis of heart failure.[28] [62] Higher levels of natriuretic peptide biomarkers are associated
with increased risk for long-term adverse outcomes (including all-cause and cardiovascular death) in
patients with heart failure.[62] Several other cardiac and noncardiac conditions may also be associated
with elevated levels.[28] [62]
• Multi-detector computed tomography [CT] pulmonary angiography, ventilation/perfusion [V/Q] scan,
transthoracic echocardiography, pulmonary angiography, and duplex ultrasound of femoral and calf
veins) may be used to confirm the diagnosis of PE.
• CT angiogram may confirm the diagnosis of leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm, if the patient's
condition is not critical. An abdominal CT may also be performed in patients who are stable with
suspected retroperitoneal bleed.
• Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy in patients with suspected upper gastrointestinal bleed, and
colonoscopy for people with suspected lower gastrointestinal bleed, may provide the definitive
diagnosis.
• Following stabilization of a patient with Addisonian crisis, the diagnosis may be further investigated
with a morning serum cortisol, and a high-dose (250 micrograms) adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) stimulation test.[63]
• Primary hypothyroidism is diagnosed by elevated serum TSH and low T4.
• Various tests may help confirm anaphylaxis and identify the allergen to which the patient has become
sensitised. In adults, blood should be taken to assess mast cell tryptase levels as soon as possible
after emergency treatment has started with a second sample ideally within 1 to 2 hours (but no
later than 4 hours) from the onset of symptoms. A third sample should be taken during a follow-up
appointment.[64] Serum histamine is a less specific marker for anaphylaxis. A radioallergosorbent
test, specific skin tests (Ig E), and a post-episode challenge test may be helpful in identifying the
allergen.[46] [64]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Chronic or recurring hypotension
Specific symptoms of chronic illnesses known to predispose to either chronic or recurring hypotension should
be sought. Such illnesses include:
• Diabetes mellitus
• Addison disease
• Parkinsonism (including Parkinson disease and Parkinson plus syndromes, such as multisystem
atrophy)
• Chronic liver disease
Symptoms of these conditions should alert the clinician to the need for specific laboratory investigations.
Prevalence of various chronic illnesses presenting as hypotension differs based on age.
•
Chronic illness presenting with hypotension based on patient age
Created by The BMJ Group
Younger adults
Exclusion of pregnancy via historical inquiry and pregnancy testing is appropriate in all women of a child-
bearing age.
A neurally-mediated reflex syncope should be suspected in younger adults with a past medical history
of syncopal symptoms in childhood and a positive family history of vasovagal syncope, but with no other
current symptoms.[77] The precipitant provoking event varies from syndrome to syndrome (e.g., in vasovagal
syncope prolonged standing is a common precipitant, whereas in other situational syndromes the precipitant
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
may be micturition, postprandial state, cough, sneeze, visceral pain, post-exercise, brass instrument playing,
and weightlifting.[16]
Primary autonomic failure or primary amyloidosis may also be considered if symptoms of hypotension are
occurring on a daily basis.[78] [79] [80]
Any adult age group
Secondary amyloidosis may occur in younger or older patients.
Diabetes mellitus (leading to diabetic neuropathy with orthostatic hypotension), Addison disease, and chronic
liver disease can exist in younger or older patients. A history of chronic fatigue, itch, muscle or joint pains
may indicate chronic liver disease. Patients with diabetic neuropathy may have evidence of painless injuries,
commonly to their feet, and orthostatic hypotension on testing. Patients with a known history of malnutrition
(especially in the setting of alcohol abuse), bowel surgery, prolonged parenteral nutrition, hyperemesis
gravidarum, or other cause of chronic vomiting should be suspected of thiamine deficiency.
•
Plantar ulcer in a patient with type 1 diabetes
From the collection of Rodica Pop-Busui, University of Michigan, MI; used with permission
Older adults
Older patients are more likely to present with chronic persistent or paroxysmal arrhythmias, and
parkinsonism. Hypotension prevalence in idiopathic Parkinson disease increases with disease duration,
whereas it is an early feature of disease in patients with Parkinson plus syndromes (e.g., multisystem
atrophy). One prospective study reported a cumulative prevalence of orthostatic hypotension in patients with
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Parkinson disease of over 65% after 7 years. Almost 30% of patients had clinically significant orthostatic
hypotension.[81]
Older adults are also more likely to develop hypotension secondary to vitamin B12 deficiency than younger
adults, as this diagnosis increases in prevalence with age.[82] Several forms of neurally mediated reflex
syncope (e.g., micturition syncope) occur more commonly in older patients, and should be suspected by their
history.[83] 
The carotid sinus syndrome only occurs in patients over 50 years, and is rare in patients under 70
years.[84] A classical history of syncope (secondary to hypotension) occurring after turning or extending the
neck is not always present. 
Examination:
• Patients with no acute cardiogenic cause for hypotension should be placed supine in bed while
undergoing evaluation. In patients with suspected vasovagal syncope or situational syncope, it is often
helpful to elevate their legs for a short period of time while their blood pressure normalizes. Nursing
staff should be alerted to their potential falls risk.
• Should include a check for signs of Addisonism (e.g., hyperpigmentation) or hypopituitarism (dry skin,
loss of axillary or pubic hair).
• Signs of chronic liver disease should be sought (e.g., jaundice, hepatomegaly, peripheral edema,
ascites, spider nevi, caput medusa).
• Diabetes mellitus, vitamin B12 deficiency and thiamine deficiency are all potential causes of
hypotension if a patient has evidence of peripheral neuropathy on physical examination.
• Patients with neurally-mediated reflex syncope, and those with primary autonomic failure will
usually have an unremarkable physical exam. The latter may be difficult to distinguish from primary
amyloidosis on physical exam alone, although macroglossia, lower limb edema or purpura may be
present in amyloidosis.
• Palpate for a gravid uterus in women of childbearing potential with no other apparent cause of
hypotension.
Investigations:
• Include:
• CBC (the presence of macrocytosis may suggest the presence of vitamin B12 deficiency,
chronic liver disease, thiamine deficiency, or hypothyroidism)
• Blood glucose (if undiagnosed diabetes is suspected, it is usually confirmed with a fasting blood
glucose or an elevated serum hemoglobin A1C)
• Serum electrolytes (hyponatremia may indicate Addison disease, hypothyroidism, or chronic
liver disease if secondary hyperaldosteronism is present)
• Serum aminotransferases and bilirubin
• Coagulation profile
• A 12-lead ECG.
• Additionally for older adults, the following should be considered:
• Thyroid function tests (TSH and free T4)
• Serum vitamin B12 concentration.
• Further investigations are as follows:
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
• A urinary beta human choriogonadotropin: to confirm pregnancy.
• Thiamine deficiency can be confirmed by serum thiamine pyrophosphate concentration.
• Chronic liver disease is usually supported by the presence of deranged serum
aminotransferases, by impaired synthetic function markers (e.g., elevated international
normalized ratio, elevated bilirubin), appropriate imaging and liver biopsy (at a later date).
• Addison disease can be confirmed by the presence of a low serum cortisol and an inadequate
response to administration of cosyntropin.
• Hypopituitarism can be confirmed by demonstration of evidence of hypothyroidism and adrenal
insufficiency combined with a low follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone, with
reduced serum estradiol in women, or reduced serum testosterone in men. TSH and ACTH are
also inappropriately low in relation to levels of thyroid hormone and cortisol.
• The presence of amyloidosis can be confirmed by tissue biopsy and staining with Congo Red
(positive/green birefringence).
• Tilt table testing has a variable level of sensitivity in the presence of neurally-mediated reflex
syncope which is best diagnosed clinically. It may help to confirm the diagnosis of vasovagal
syncope (reproduction of symptoms with prolonged [40 min] tilt).[16] [85] [86] It may also be
used with carotid sinus massage to help diagnose older people with suspected carotid sinus
syndrome. Patients have a symptomatic fall in BP ± syncope precipitated by carotid sinus
massage. Patients with the pure vasodepressor subtype do not have an associated cardiac
pause, unlike patients with the cardio-inhibitory subtype who have an associated inducible
cardiac pause/asystole exceeding 3 seconds.[16]
• The presence of primary autonomic failure can be confirmed by a number of specialized
tests including: 1) plasma norepinephrine - failure to release norepinephrine on standing;
2) deep breathing - diminished beat-to-beat variation on ECG during inspiration and
expiration; 3) Valsalva maneuver - failure of the BP overshoot after release of the strain;
4) electrophysiological testing - reduction in sensory nerve conduction velocity; muscle
denervation; 5) quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test - absence of sweat production; 6) heart
rate variability - decreased heart rate variability.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials overview
Common
Nonhemorrhagic volume losses
Upper gastrointestinal bleed
Lower gastrointestinal bleed
Dialysis-induced hypotension
Trauma
Acute coronary syndrome
Acute heart failure
Dysrhythmia
Acute pulmonary embolism
Vasovagal syncope
Medication-related
Pregnancy (uncomplicated)
Sepsis
Chronic liver disease
Parkinson disease
Uncommon
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
Ectopic pregnancy
Retroperitoneal bleed
Severe acute pancreatitis
Carotid sinus syndrome (cardioinhibitory subtype)
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Uncommon
Severe hypothyroidism
Tension pneumothorax
Cardiac tamponade
Situational syncope
Anaphylaxis
Carotid sinus syndrome (vasodepressor subtype)
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
Multi-system atrophy
Post-stroke
Primary autonomic failure
Amyloidosis
Adrenal suppression (iatrogenic)
Addison disease
Hypopituitarism
Thiamine deficiency
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Carcinoid syndrome
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials
Common
◊ Nonhemorrhagic volume losses
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
often older adults; may
be a history of vomiting
and diarrhea, prolonged
period of illness, or
diuretic use; burns;
profound sweating;
decreased oral
intake; bronchorrhea
or draining pleural
effusion; history of or
risk factors for diabetes
insipidus; risk factors
for diabetic ketoacidosis
or hyperosmolar
hyperglycemic state;
may be fever; thirst;
fatigue; dizziness on
standing
hypotension may be
profound if there is
shock with decreasing
level of consciousness;
fever; tachycardia;
weak pulse; dry
mucous membranes;
decreased skin turgor
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum
LFTs, coagulation
profile): elevated
BUN and creatinine;
normal, elevated or
low serum sodium;
low serum potassium
(with diarrhea);
elevated hematocrit;
elevated WBC count (if
infectious cause)
BUN and creatinine
may not be elevated in
an older adult (normal
BUN may be due to
poor nutrition; normal
creatinine due to
smaller muscle mass).
»ECG: sinus
tachycardia,
tachyarrhythmia
»urinalysis: high
specific gravity
»ABG: prolonged
diarrhea: low
bicarbonate; prolonged
vomiting: high
bicarbonate
Indicated in presence of
shock.
»random urine
sodium: <20 mmol/L
(<20 mEq/L)
The urine sodium is low
in volume depletion as
the kidney conserves
sodium and water to
maintain extracellular
volume.[87]
Inappropriately elevated
urine sodium in the
setting of apparent
volume depletion
would support renal
salt wasting or diuretic
use.[87]
This test will not always
be helpful in individuals
with underlying kidney
disease, patients
receiving diuretics,
or during states of
osmotic diuresis,
metabolic alkalosis,
or hypoaldosteronism.
Low urine chloride
excretion is a more
reliable indicator of
volume depletion in
patients with metabolic
alkalosis.[9]
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Common
◊ Nonhemorrhagic volume losses
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
»fractional excretion
of sodium: <1%
A low value (<1%)
indicates that most of
the sodium delivered
to the kidney is
reabsorbed, as is seen
in volume depletion.
»random urine
creatinine: elevated
Required for the
calculation of fractional
excretion of sodium
»random urine
osmolality: >450
mmol/kg (>450 mOsm/
kg)
»stool culture:
normal; may show
growth of bacteria,
toxins or parasites
Can establish infectious
etiology in cases of
severe diarrhea.
»urine microscopy
and culture: normal
or evidence of bacterial
growth
Hypotension due to
sepsis as the result of
a urinary tract infection
is not uncommon and
initially may be the
only clinical finding,
particularly in older
adults.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
Upper gastrointestinal bleed
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory
drugs use, often
with concomitant
corticosteroid use;
may be history of
peptic ulcer disease or
chronic liver disease;
upper abdominal pain
(frequently absent
in older adults);
hematemesis; coffee
ground emesis; fatigue,
dizziness
hypotension may be
profound if there is
shock with decreasing
level of consciousness;
pallor, abdominal
tenderness (usually
upper abdomen); signs
of chronic liver disease
(e.g., palmar erythema,
spider angiomata,
petechiae, jaundice,
hepatomegaly, ascites,
muscle wasting,
gynecomastia, pedal
and ankle edema);
rectal exam positive for
melena
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum
LFTs, coagulation
profile, type and
cross): normal or
low Hb, elevated
BUN:creatinine ratio;
may be abnormal
prothrombin time and
prolonged INR
»ECG: sinus
tachycardia
»upper
gastrointestinal
endoscopy: source
of bleeding may be
visualized
Possible sources
include peptic ulcer,
gastritis, Mallory Weiss
tear, or esophageal
varices.
Lower gastrointestinal bleed
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
may be known history
of inflammatory bowel
disease or lower
gastrointestinal tumor;
melena; hematochezia;
abdominal pain (left-
sided in older adult
suggests diverticular
disease); fatigue;
dizziness
hypotension may be
profound if there is
hemorrhagic shock
with decreasing level of
consciousness; may be
blood on digital rectal
exam; abdominal exam
may be normal, or may
be tenderness; patients
with colonic tumor
may have a palpable
abdominal mass
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum
LFTs, coagulation
profile, type and
cross): normal or
low Hb; elevated
BUN:creatinine ratio;
may be abnormal
prothrombin time and
prolonged INR
»ECG: sinus
tachycardia
»colonoscopy:
source of bleeding
may be visualized
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Common
Lower gastrointestinal bleed
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
(e.g., diverticulae,
colonic angioma,
polyps, evidence of
inflammatory bowel
disease or colonic
tumor)
»mesenteric
angiography: the site
of active bleeding may
be seen[88]
◊ Dialysis-induced hypotension
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
presence of
hypotension during
dialysis session;
previous history of
dialysis-induced
hypotension; presence
of other condition that
may predispose to
hypotension (e.g.,
intercurrent infective
illness leading to
dehydration); diabetes,
large interdialytic
weight gain, female
sex and low body
weight are risk factors
for dialysis-induced
hypotension
tachycardia; weak
pulse; increased skin
turgor; dry mucous
membranes; signs of
chronic renal failure
(e.g., increased skin
pigmentation)
»clinical exam:
usually a clinical
diagnosis
»ECG: may be sinus
tachycardia, evidence
of tachyarrhythmia
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
coagulation profile):
elevated BUN and
creatinine; low or high
serum sodium; elevated
hematocrit
Trauma
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of road
traffic accident, fall,
penetrating injury, blunt
trauma
may be signs of
external bleeding;
open fracture;
tender abdomen
concealing intra-
abdominal hemorrhage;
decreased breath
sounds and dullness
to percussion on chest
examination may
»CBC, type and
cross: may be low or
normal Hb
»coagulation screen:
serum PT, INR and
PTT may be prolonged
or elevated
»x-ray trauma
series: hemothorax if
»diagnostic
peritoneal lavage:
blood in the abdomen
on drainage of fluid
suggests intra-
abdominal bleed
Carried out less
frequently now; CT
scanning is usually the
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
Trauma
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
indicate hemothorax;
unstable pelvis if
fractured; narrow pulse
pressure
chest injury, widened
mediastinum suggests
aortic disruption, pelvic
fractures if present
Trauma series includes
anteroposterior and
lateral cervical spine
views, chest x-ray, and
abdomen/pelvis.
»Focused
Assessment with
Sonography for
Trauma scan:
positive if free fluid
in the abdomen or
pericardium is identified
Ultrasound study that
looks at perihepatic,
perisplenic, pelvic,
and pericardial areas
to identify possible
hemorrhage.
»CT scan: may show
blood in abdominal
cavity
Usually now done
in preference to
diagnostic peritoneal
lavage if the patient is
stable.
method of choice if the
patient is stable.
Acute coronary syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of risk factors for
coronary artery disease
(CAD) (e.g., smoking,
hyperlipidemia,
diabetes, family history
of CAD); chest pain
(often described as
heavy or tight) radiating
to arms, back, neck,
hypotension may be
profound if there is
cardiogenic shock
+ decreasing level
of consciousness;
diaphoretic
appearance;
pallor; tachycardia;
bradycardia; new
»ECG: ST segment
elevation or depression,
or T wave changes
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
serum troponin, d-
dimer, coagulation
»fasting serum
lipids (total
cholesterol, LDL
cholesterol, HDL
cholesterol and
triglycerides):
variable
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Common
Acute coronary syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
or jaw; chest pain may
be absent in older
adults and people with
diabetes; dyspnea;
nausea; diaphoresis
abnormal pulse rhythm;
distended jugular veins;
other signs of heart
failure (e.g., dyspnea,
crackles at lung bases);
new heart murmur
profile): elevated
serum troponin
»coronary
angiogram: presence
of thrombus with
occlusion of the artery
»chest x-ray:
evidence of pulmonary
congestion/pleural
effusion if secondary
heart failure, may
show enlarged cardiac
shadow
To check for
hypercholesterolemia,
low HDL cholesterol,
high LDL cholesterol,
and elevated
triglycerides.
»fasting blood
glucose: normal, or
above normal range if
diabetes detected
Performed only if initial
random blood glucose
is elevated.
»echocardiogram:
may demonstrate
regional wall motion
abnormality
Acute heart failure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
acute onset shortness
of breath; orthopnea;
may be history of
known heart failure or
of risk factors (e.g.,
recent myocardial
infarction, valvular heart
disease, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, known
bacterial endocarditis,
rheumatic fever, or
Marfan syndrome)
hypotension may be
profound if there is
cardiogenic shock
plus decreasing level
of consciousness;
distended jugular veins;
crackles at lung bases;
new murmur; additional
heart sounds; fever
in endocarditis; mitral
facies (mild cyanosis
of lips/cheeks without
clubbing) may be
present if mitral
stenosis is a causative
factor; may be signs
of Marfan syndrome
(e.g., tall stature, wide
arm span, high arched
palate, arachnodactyly
with positive thumb
sign)
»ECG: nearly always
abnormal; may show
arrhythmias, ischemic
ST and T wave
changes
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
serum troponin, d-
dimer, coagulation
profile): serum
troponin: elevated
in acute coronary
ischemia; low Hb if
anemia the cause;
WBC count may be
elevated
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone and
free T4: abnormal if
»B-type natriuretic
peptide (BNP): >400
picogram/mL may
be indicative of heart
failure
BNP <100 picogram/
mL suggests a
noncardiac etiology
of dyspnea. In acute
settings, BNP levels
may be more useful for
ruling out than ruling
in a diagnosis of heart
failure.[28] [62] Several
other cardiac and
noncardiac conditions
may also be associated
with elevated levels.[28]
[62]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
Acute heart failure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
associated hypo- or
hyperthyroidism
»chest x-ray:
cardiomegaly,
pulmonary congestion,
pleural effusion,
valvular or pericardial
calcification
»echocardiogram:
new valvular
dysfunction (e.g.,
mitral regurgitation);
endocarditis: may show
vegetations
»fasting serum
lipids (total
cholesterol, LDL
cholesterol, HDL
cholesterol and
triglycerides):
variable
»blood cultures:
endocarditis: positive
cultures
Dysrhythmia
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
more common in older
patients; symptoms
may be acute, chronic,
or paroxysmal;
palpitations; chest pain;
syncope; dizziness;
dyspnea; may be
history of dysrhythmia,
heart disease or heart
failure
signs may be acute,
chronic or paroxysmal;
hypotension may be
profound if there is
cardiogenic shock
+ decreasing level
of consciousness;
tachycardia;
bradycardia; irregular
pulse; may have signs
of heart failure (e.g.,
distended jugular veins,
crackles at lung base,
peripheral edema)
»ECG: dysrhythmia
demonstrated
Dysrhythmia may
be tachycardic, or
bradycardic.
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
serum troponin, d-
dimer, coagulation
profile): may be low
Hb, abnormal serum
electrolytes
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4:
thyroid-stimulating
hormone and
free T4 may be
abnormal if hypo- or
hyperthyroidism cause
of dysrhythmia
»cardiac telemetry:
dysrhythmia
demonstrated
»24-hour ECG
monitor: dysrhythmia
demonstrated
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Common
Acute pulmonary embolism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
dyspnea; pleuritic
chest pain (often
absent in older
adults); hemoptysis;
palpitations; feeling
of apprehension; may
be history of recent
immobilization (e.g.,
prolonged air flight,
surgery), obesity,
pregnancy/postpartum
period, inherited
thrombophilias, active
malignancy, recent
trauma/fracture, or
history of deep vein
thrombosis
hypotension may
be profound if large
pulmonary embolism
(PE) but in other cases
physical exam can
be normal; may be
tachypnea; pleural rub
on chest auscultation;
tachycardia; low
oxygen saturations
on pulse oximetry
(may be transient); calf
tenderness
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
serum troponin, d-
dimer, coagulation
profile): d-dimer:
normal or elevated
Sensitivity and negative
predictive value
depends on the type
of laboratory technique
used to measure d-
dimer.
»ABG: may be
normal; hypoxia and
hypocapnia suggestive
of PE
»ECG: tachycardia,
new right axis
deviation, new right
bundle branch block, S
wave in lead I, Q wave
with T-wave inversion in
lead III
These features are
suggestive but not
diagnostic of PE.
»chest x-ray: band
atelectasis, elevation
of hemidiaphragm,
prominent central
pulmonary artery,
oligemia at site of
embolism
These features are
suggestive but not
diagnostic of PE.
»multi-detector
computed
tomography
pulmonary
angiography:
direct visualization
of thrombus in a
pulmonary artery,
appears as a partial or
complete intraluminal
filling defect
Recommended imaging
in patients with a high
probability of PE (e.g.,
likely clinical probability,
or an abnormal d-dimer
test).
»ventilation/
perfusion (V/Q)
scan: normal, low,
intermediate, and
high probability; PE
likely when an area
of ventilation is not
perfused
Performed if there is a
contraindication to a CT
scan. Normal reading
is the most sensitive of
all the imaging tests for
excluding PE.[92]
»transthoracic
echocardiography:
may show features
indicating right
ventricular strain/
dysfunction
»pulmonary
angiography:
demonstrates complete
or incomplete filling
defect in the pulmonary
artery
Definitive test for the
diagnosis or exclusion
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
Acute pulmonary embolism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
of PE, but associated
with a higher rate of
morbidity/mortality than
other tests. Now used
less frequently.
»duplex ultrasound
of femoral and
calf veins:
noncompressible leg
veins
To aid in identifying
source, particularly if
other tests negative
and diagnosis
suspected.
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
(older adults only):
normal
◊ Vasovagal syncope
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
previous history
(including childhood)
of faints; typical
premonitory warning
symptoms of feeling
warm, nauseated,
dizzy, distant from
surroundings (may not
be reported by older
patients)
normal cardiac
examination; features
of witnessed event
include transient loss
of consciousness, may
be myoclonic type jerks
during the event, may
appear flushed initially
with pallor immediately
preceding loss of
consciousness
»clinical exam:
diagnosis may be made
on history and exam
findings alone
Presentation without
typical symptoms/
warning signs in
young adults and
new symptoms in
older adults warrant
investigation.
»ECG: normal
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
coagulation profile):
normal
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
»tilt table testing
with beat-to-
beat (phasic) BP
monitoring (e.g.,
digital artery
photoplethysmography):
reproduction of
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Common
◊ Vasovagal syncope
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
symptoms with
prolonged (40 min) tilt
Sensitivity in young
adults is poor
(approximately 20%);
high false positive rate,
particularly if tilt table
testing is combined
with provocative drug
administration (e.g.,
sublingual nitrate)
◊ Medication-related
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of recently
introduced medication
known to produce
hypotension; common
responsible drug
classes include beta-
blockers, alpha-
blockers, diuretics,
nitrates, calcium
channel blockers,
ACE inhibitors,
L-dopa, tricyclic
antidepressants,
phenothiazines,
opioids (in high
doses), intravenous
acetaminophen in
critically ill hospitalized
patients; more common
in older adults
change in BP readings
date from after
introduction of new
medication, and
improvement noted
after discontinuation
of drug; no specific
physical exam findings
to suggest other cause
»discontinuation
of suspected
precipitating
medication: clinical
improvement on
discontinuation of
medication
Diagnosis may be
made from the history
and clinical exam. If
there is uncertainty
about diagnosis,
further tests may be
performed.
»urine toxicology
screen: may be
positive for opioids
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
coagulation profile):
normal
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone and free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
»ECG: normal
◊ Pregnancy (uncomplicated)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
woman of childbearing
age; delayed
menstruation; history
of unprotected sexual
intercourse; may be
known pregnancy or
gravid uterus on
abdominal or pelvic
exam; fetal heart on
auscultation
»urinary pregnancy
test: positive
»serum beta HCG:
positive
»pelvic ultrasound:
live fetus present
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Pregnancy (uncomplicated)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history may indicate the
patient is unaware she
is pregnant
Sepsis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
symptoms of localized
infection, nonspecific
symptoms include
fever or shivering,
dizziness, nausea
and vomiting, muscle
pain, feeling confused
or disoriented;
may be history of
risk factors (e.g.,
immunosuppression,
pregnancy or
postpartum period,
frailty, recent surgery
or invasive procedures,
intravenous drug
use, or breach of skin
integrity)
tachycardia, tachypnea,
hypotension, fever
>101°F (>38°C)
or hypothermia
>97°F (<36°C),
prolonged capillary
refill, mottled or ashen
skin, cyanosis, low
oxygen saturation,
newly altered mental
state, reduced urine
output
»blood culture: may
be positive for organism
Blood cultures should
be taken immediately,
and preferably
before antibiotics
are started, provided
their sampling will not
delay administration
of antibiotics. Other
cultures (for example,
sputum, stool, and
urine) should be taken
as clinically indicated.
»serum lactate: may
be elevated; levels
>18 mg/dL (>2 mmol/
L) associated with
adverse prognosis;
even worse prognosis
with levels ≥36 mg/dL
(≥4 mmol/L) elevated
Elevated serum
lactate indicates tissue
hypoperfusion, and is
most reliably assessed
using an arterial
sample.
»CBC with
differential: WBC
count >12×10⁹/
L (12,000/mL)
(leukocytosis); WBC
count <4×10⁹/L (4000/
mL) (leukopenia); or a
normal WBC count with
»urine microscopy
and culture: may
be positive for nitrites,
protein or blood;
elevated leukocyte
count; positive culture
for organism
»sputum culture:
may be positive for
organism
»chest x-ray: may
show pleural effusion,
consolidation, cardiac
abnormalities or
a pneumothorax,
demonstrates position
of central venous
catheter and tracheal
tube
»echocardiogram:
inadequate left
ventricular filling
suggests hypovolemia;
vegetations if
endocarditis cause of
sepsis
Indicated in patients
with acute heart failure
thought to be due to
endocarditis.
»lumbar puncture:
may be elevated
WBC count, presence
of organism on
microscopy and
positive culture
Performed if meningitis
suspected.
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Common
Sepsis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
>10% immature forms;
low platelets
WBC count is sensitive
but not specific for the
diagnosis of sepsis.
»C-reactive protein:
elevated
»blood urea and
serum electrolytes:
serum electrolytes may
be deranged; blood
urea may be elevated
»serum creatinine:
may be elevated
Elevated creatinine
may occur in sepsis
associated with renal
dysfunction.
»LFTs: may
show elevated
bilirubin, alanine
aminotransferase,
aspartate
aminotransferase,
alkaline phosphatase,
and gamma glutamyl
transpeptidase
Sepsis can originate
from hepatic or
perihepatic infections.
Comorbid hepatic
disease can affect drug
metabolism. Septic
shock can compromise
hepatic blood flow and
metabolism.
»coagulation
studies: may be
abnormal
»ECG: may show
evidence of ischemia,
atrial fibrillation, or
other arrhythmia; may
be normal
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
Sepsis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
An ECG should
be arranged to
help exclude other
differential diagnoses,
including myocardial
infarction, pericarditis,
and myocarditis. Sepsis
also predisposes to
myocardial dysfunction
and arrhythmias.
»ABG: may be
hypoxia, hypercapnia,
elevated anion gap,
metabolic acidosis
◊ Chronic liver disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
known history of
chronic liver disease;
pruritus; abdominal
swelling; confusion;
lethargy; weight loss;
weakness; bruising;
may be worsening
light-headedness
and unsteadiness in
presence of concurrent
hematemesis, melena
or other symptoms
of gastrointestinal
bleed; history of sepsis
(fever, anorexia, focal
symptoms depending
on site of infection)
may be jaundice;
muscle wasting;
gynecomastia; palmar
erythema; spider
angiomata; petechiae;
ascites; distended
abdominal veins;
hepatosplenomegaly;
signs of
encephalopathy (e.g.,
memory, attention, and
concentration deficits,
confusion, asterixis,
nystagmus, clonus,
rigidity, coma)
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum
LFTs, coagulation
profile): elevated liver
enzymes; elevated
bilirubin (conjugated);
may be low Hb and low
platelets; INR may be
elevated
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
(older adults only):
normal
»ECG: normal
»blood cultures:
concurrent sepsis:
infective organism
isolated
»urine microscopy
and culture:
concurrent urinary
infection: infective
organism isolated
»paracentesis:
concurrent infective
peritonitis: infective
organism isolated
Performed if
spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis suspected.
»upper
gastrointestinal
endoscopy: may
demonstrate source
of gastrointestinal
bleed, varices may be
visualized
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Common
◊ Parkinson disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
more common in older
adults; usually long-
standing history of
Parkinson disease;
may be recent
initiation or change
in anti-Parkinsonian
medication, or
symptoms of
concurrent general
medical illness (e.g.,
dysuria and urinary
frequency with
urosepsis, or cough
with purulent sputum
with pneumonia)
bradykinesia; tremor;
increased tone;
postural instability;
stooped shuffling gait
with reduced arm-
swing, mask-like face;
signs of intercurrent
infection (e.g., fever,
crackles on chest
auscultation)
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum
LFTs, coagulation
profile): CBC may
show elevated WBC
count if infection
present
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum B12
(older adults only):
normal
»ECG: normal
Uncommon
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
abdominal pain
radiating to back;
abdominal distension;
bilateral flank pain;
light-headedness; may
be a history of risk
factors (e.g., smoking,
peripheral vascular
disease, known history
of aneurysm)
hypotension may
be profound with
decreasing level
of consciousness;
abdominal tenderness;
pulsatile mass; weak
peripheral pulses
»clinical exam:
diagnosis of acute
rupture is usually made
by history and clinical
findings
Patient requires urgent
resuscitation and
surgical treatment.
»bedside abdominal
ultrasound: may
demonstrate site of leak
or extravasation; color
flow Doppler can aid
detection; sensitivity
and specificity for
rupture are low
A bedside ultrasound
is a reasonable
and simple test if
it does not delay
emergency transfer
to the operating room
for a hemodynamically
unstable patient.[89]
[90]
»CT thorax and
abdomen: impending
rupture: may
demonstrate blood
within the thrombus
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
(crescent sign), low
thrombus-to-lumen
ratio, retroperitoneal
hematoma,
discontinuity of
the aortic wall, or
extravasation of
contrast into the
peritoneal cavity
May be performed in
suspected cases of
impending bleed.
Ectopic pregnancy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
women of childbearing
age; amenorrhea; may
be known pregnancy;
abdominal pain; vaginal
bleeding; may be
history of previous
ectopic pregnancy,
prior tubal surgery,
pelvic inflammatory
disease, or
intrauterine contraception
use
tachycardia; abdominal
tenderness and
guarding; decreased
bowel sounds; cervical
motion tenderness;
vaginal bleeding
»urinary pregnancy
test: positive
If hemodynamic
instability is present
and rupture is
suspected, diagnostic
steps may be expedited
or bypassed in
favor of urgent fluid
resuscitation and
surgical intervention.
»CBC, type and
cross: may be low Hb
If hemodynamic
instability is present
and rupture is
suspected, diagnostic
steps may be expedited
or bypassed in
favor of urgent fluid
resuscitation and
surgical intervention.
»transvaginal
ultrasound:
visualization of ectopic
pregnancy; empty
uterus
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Uncommon
Retroperitoneal bleed
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
symptoms may be
vague; groin, lower
abdominal, or back
pain; history of risk
factors (e.g., recent
anticoagulation use,
recent history of
cardiac or femoral
angiography, recent
obstetric procedure in
women of childbearing
age)
unexplained
tachycardia; tenderness
in lower abdomen on
side of bleed; may
be bruising of flank;
diaphoresis if severe;
profound hypotension
with decreasing levels
of consciousness if
shock present
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs
coagulation profile,
type and cross):
low Hb; INR may be
elevated
»ECG: normal, or
tachycardia
»CT abdomen:
hematoma may be
visualized
»CT angiogram: may
demonstrate active
bleeding site if bleeding
is ongoing
◊ Severe acute pancreatitis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Sudden-onset
continuous upper
abdominal pain,
typically radiating to
the back; nausea and
vomiting, malaise;
history of alcohol use
or gallstones, may be
history of azathioprine,
mercaptopurine or
didanosine use
Epigastric or left upper
quadrant tenderness
with voluntary guarding,
abdominal distension,
may be reduced
bowel sounds;
hypotension, dry
mucous membranes,
reduced skin turgor,
oliguria, sweating,
tachycardia, tachypnea;
signs of pleural effusion
(more commonly left
side); jaundice
»serum lipase or
amylase: >3 times the
upper limit of normal
Use serum lipase, if
available, in preference
to serum amylase.
Serum lipase and
amylase have
similar sensitivity
and specificity but
lipase levels remain
elevated for longer
(up to 14 days after
symptom onset vs.
5 days for amylase),
providing a higher
likelihood of picking
up the diagnosis in
patients with a delayed
presentation.[91]
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes,
serum calcium,
blood glucose,
serum LFTs): CBC:
leukocytosis, elevated
»chest x-ray: may
show atelectasis and
pleural effusion
»transabdominal
ultrasound: may
show gallstones;
may show pancreatic
inflammation,
peripancreatic
stranding, calcifications
or fluid collections
Imaging is not
required to confirm the
diagnosis.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Severe acute pancreatitis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
hematocrit indicates
dehydration; elevated
urea and/or creatinine
in dehydration; elevated
aminotransferases
suggests gallstones
as the cause;
hypercalcemia is a rare
cause of pancreatitis
»C-reactive protein:
elevated
»arterial blood
gas: may show
hypoxemia or acid-base
disturbance
◊ Carotid sinus syndrome (cardioinhibitory subtype)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of recurrent or
unexplained falls, drop
attacks or collapse
episodes occurring in
an older adult (usually
>70 years); patient may
not report classical
precipitant of neck
extension or turning
usually unremarkable
clinical findings; on
clinical exam there
are no differentiating
features from the
vasodepressor
subtype of carotid
sinus syndrome and
differential findings are
almost always at time
of tilt table testing with
carotid sinus massage
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
serum troponin, d-
dimer, coagulation
profile): normal
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
»ECG: usually normal;
may show first degree
heart block
»tilt table test
with carotid sinus
massage: inducible
cardiac pause/asystole
exceeding 3 seconds
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Severe hypothyroidism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
weight gain; weakness;
lethargy; slow speech;
cold sensation;
forgetfulness;
constipation; neck
swelling
evidence of severe
hypothyroidism (e.g.,
coma, hypothermia,
signs of heart failure);
coarse hair; facial
edema; bradycardia;
eyelid edema; thick
tongue
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
serum troponin,
coagulation profile):
CBC: may have
elevated MCV
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4:
primary hypothyroidism:
elevated thyroid-
stimulating hormone,
low T4
»serum B12 (older
adults only): normal
Tension pneumothorax
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
sudden onset pleuritic
chest pain; severe and
worsening dyspnea;
rapid deterioration;
may be risk factors
(e.g., recent placement
of central venous
pressure line, history of
emphysema or chest
trauma)
acute distress;
cyanosis; profuse
diaphoresis;
tachycardia;
absent unilateral
breath sounds;
hyperresonance to
percussion on affected
side; tracheal shift from
midline; hypotension
develops rapidly with
subsequent loss of
consciousness
»diagnostic and
therapeutic needle
thoracostomy: hiss of
air as catheter/needle
enters the pleural
space
Should be performed
immediately. Time
should not be wasted
waiting for a chest x-
ray.
»post-
decompression
chest x-ray: shows
a visceral pleural line;
confirms position of
intercostal drain
Only performed after
urgent decompression.
Cardiac tamponade
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
chest pain reduced
by sitting forward;
shortness of breath;
may be risk factors
present (e.g., recent
myocardial infarction,
pericarditis, coronary
hypotension may
be profound with
decreasing level
of consciousness;
increased respiratory
rate; distended
jugular veins, reduced
»chest x-ray:
enlargement of cardiac
shadow
»ECG: rhythm strip:
beat-to-beat electrical
alternans
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
serum troponin, d-
dimer, coagulation
profile): may be
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Cardiac tamponade
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
angiogram, or cardiac
surgery)
heart sounds and
hypotension (Beck
triad); tachycardia;
pulsus paradoxus (high
positive predictive value
and sensitivity, though
lower specificity)
»echocardiogram:
typically: large
pericardial effusion
(>20 mm of echo-
free space in
diastole between the
visceral and parietal
pericardium); chamber
collapse and respiratory
variation of ventricular
filling
Atypical findings
include signs of:
loculated effusion,
low pressure, external
compression from
tumor, or pleural
effusion.
low Hb if anemia is
a related cause; viral
pericarditis: elevated
WBC count; elevated
troponin if cardiac
trauma or myocardial
infarction
»erythrocyte
sedimentation
rate: elevated in
the presence of
inflammatory or
infective cause
◊ Situational syncope
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
previous history of
faints precipitated
by similar event,
recognized precipitants
include micturition,
defecation, exercise,
brass instrument
playing, weightlifting,
and eye exam
normal cardiac exam;
features of witnessed
event include transient
loss of consciousness,
may be myoclonic type
jerks during the event,
pallor
»clinical exam:
diagnosis may be made
on history and exam
findings alone
Further tests are
warranted if there are
no recognized and
consistent precipitants.
»ECG: normal
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
coagulation profile):
normal
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
Anaphylaxis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of recent
ingestion/exposure to
known allergen (e.g.,
bee sting); acute onset
of symptoms with rapid
deterioration; wheeze;
rapidly progressive
signs; signs of
bronchospasm (e.g.,
audible wheeze, use
of accessory muscles);
erythematous confluent
»clinical exam:
diagnosis usually made
clinically with treatment
started without delay for
testing
»mast cell tryptase:
may be elevated;
can range from
insignificantly elevated
to levels above 100
nanograms/mL
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Uncommon
Anaphylaxis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
rash; swollen lips or
tongue; swollen eyelids;
pruritus; agitation;
anxiety; impending
sense of doom (angor
animi); nausea;
vomiting; diarrhea;
light-headedness
rash or itchy urticarial
wheals; angioedema of
tongue, lips or eyelids;
flushing; rhinitis;
inspiratory stridor;
syncope; delirium;
coma
No laboratory test
in the acute setting
should delay urgent
management of the
patient.
In adults, blood should
be taken to assess
mast cell tryptase levels
as soon as possible
after emergency
treatment has started
with a second sample
ideally within 1 to 2
hours (but no later
than 4 hours) from the
onset of symptoms. A
third sample should be
taken during a follow up
appointment.[64]
»post-episode CBC:
eosinophilia
»post-episode serum
histamine: >1.1
micrograms/L
»post-episode
radioallergosorbent
test: >0.35 international
units/L
»post-episode
specific skin tests
(Ig E): >3mm diameter
and greater than control
»post-episode
challenge test:
objective symptoms of
allergy response
»post-episode urine
test for N-methyl
histamine: increased
compared with baseline
◊ Carotid sinus syndrome (vasodepressor subtype)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of recurrent or
unexplained falls, drop
attacks or collapse
episodes occurring in
usually unremarkable
clinical findings;
typically there are no
definite differentiating
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Carotid sinus syndrome (vasodepressor subtype)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
an older adult (usually
>70 years); patient may
not report classical
precipitant of neck
extension or turning
features on clinical
exam from the cardio-
inhibitory subtype of
carotid sinus syndrome
and tilt table test with
carotid sinus massage
is required
serum troponin, d-
dimer, coagulation
profile): normal
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
»ECG: normal
»tilt table test
with carotid
sinus massage:
symptomatic fall in BP
± syncope precipitated.
Pure vasodepressor
subtype does not have
an associated cardiac
pause
Mixed carotid sinus
syndrome will have
features of both
cardio-inhibitory and
vasodepressor.
◊ Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
known history of
diabetes mellitus; may
be known peripheral
neuropathy; loss
of sensation in feet
and hands; painless
injuries; dysesthesia
impaired peripheral
(glove and stocking
distribution) sensation;
evidence of painless
injuries particularly
of feet; absent ankle
reflexes; orthostatic
hypotension
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum
LFTs, coagulation
profile): random blood
glucose: may be normal
if diabetes is well
controlled, or elevated
if poorly controlled/new
diagnosis
Random blood glucose
is not usually done for
a diagnosis of diabetes
although ≥200 mg/dL
confirms diagnosis if
typical symptoms of
»nerve conduction
studies: reduction
in sensory nerve
conduction velocity and
a decrease in amplitude
is the most sensitive
and earliest result
Diabetic neuropathy
is often a clinical
diagnosis. Only
indicated if clinical
features are atypical.
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
diabetes are present.
Fasting blood glucose
or HbA1c are usually
done for diagnostic
purposes.
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
»ECG: may be
normal; comorbid
coronary disease: may
demonstrate ischemic
changes
»fasting blood
glucose: new
diagnosis of diabetes:
126 mg/dL or higher
Only performed if
diagnosis of diabetes
has not already been
made.
»HbA1c: variable
depending on degree of
glucose control
Good glucose control:
HbA1c <7.0%. HbA1c
≥6.5% is also a
diagnostic criterion for
diabetes.
◊ Multi-system atrophy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
more commonly older
adult; parkinsonism
symptoms recently
noted; may be history
of falls or unexplained
injuries
bradykinesia; tremor;
increased tone; upward
gaze palsy; commonly
orthostatic hypotension
detected; parkinsonism,
cerebellar, autonomic
and urological
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum
LFTs, coagulation
profile): CBC may
show elevated WBC
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Multi-system atrophy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
dysfunction in any
combination
count if infection
present
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
»ECG: normal
Post-stroke
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
recent stroke, typically
in preceding days;
most commonly right
cerebral hemisphere
stroke; reduction
in patient's level of
consciousness or
deterioration in his/
her mobility and ability
to sit upright over
time; history of recent
introduction of BP
lowering medication
signs of stroke
(neurological deficit
dependent on cerebral
region affected);
BP measurements
may appear normal
at first glance but
have shown a drop
since initial admission
(hypertensive) BP
readings
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
serum troponin, d-
dimer, coagulation
profile): normal
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
If not performed
recently.
»ECG: normal or
ischemic changes
»fasting serum
lipids ( total
cholesterol, LDL
cholesterol, HDL
cholesterol and
triglycerides):
variable
◊ Primary autonomic failure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
may be a known
history of autonomic
failure and orthostatic
hypotension; dizziness
on standing; may be
erectile dysfunction,
constipation, decreased
sweating; history
of regular (daily)
symptoms occurring
within a short period
no specific physical
findings other than
orthostatic hypotension;
posture test positive
(systolic BP falls >20
mmHg and diastolic
BP falls >10 mmHg
within 3 minutes
orthostatic stress with
lack of an adequate
compensatory heart
rate increase [>20
bpm]); if posture test
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
coagulation profile):
normal
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
»tilt table test
with beat to beat
BP monitoring
(e.g., digital artery
photoplethysmography):
profound and often
prolonged hypotension
in response to head
up tilt often present;
fall in systolic BP of
>20 mmHg or diastolic
BP >10 mmHg; supine
hypertension may also
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Primary autonomic failure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
(minutes) after posture
change
normal should not
deter from further
investigation in the
presence of suggestive
history
»ECG: normal be present; presence of
presyncopal symptoms
associated with
hemodynamic changes
»specialized
physiological
tests (plasma
norepinephrine;
deep breathing:
Valsalva
maneuver test;
electrophysiological
tests; quantitative
sudomotor axon
reflex test [QSART]:
heart rate variability
test): failure to release
norepinephrine on
standing; diminished
beat-to-beat variation
on ECG during
inspiration and
expiration; failure of
the BP overshoot
after release of the
strain during Valsalva
maneuver; reduction
in sensory nerve
conduction velocity and
muscle denervation on
electrophysiological
tests; absence of sweat
production on QSART;
decreased heart rate
variability
◊ Amyloidosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of unexplained
weight loss;
parasthesia; shortness
of breath; fatigue;
dizziness on standing;
may be a known
history of amyloidosis,
or of a chronic
inflammatory condition
known to predispose
macroglossia (specific
for amyloidosis);
periorbital purpura;
lower limb edema
which is resistant
to diuretic therapy;
elevated jugular
venous pressure;
orthostatic hypotension;
signs of a chronic
»serum and urine
immunofixation:
clonal plasma cells
demonstrated
»immunoglobulin
free light chain
assay: abnormal
kappa to lambda ratio
»tissue biopsy:
positive (green)
birefringence with
Congo Red stain
Required to confirm
diagnosis.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Amyloidosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
to amyloidosis
development (e.g.,
rheumatoid arthritis)
inflammatory condition
(e.g., rheumatoid
deformities of joints,
erythematous, tender
joints, rheumatoid
nodules, skin lesions)
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum
LFTs, coagulation
profile): associated
renal insufficiency or
gastrointestinal bleed:
may be low Hb; hepatic
amyloid: elevated alk
phos
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
»ECG: may
demonstrate
conduction
abnormalities
Adrenal suppression (iatrogenic)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
More common in
patients with chronic
inflammatory disorders
such as rheumatoid
arthritis, polymyalgia
rheumatica, or
inflammatory bowel
disease. May be
associated with
intercurrent illness or
abrupt withdrawal of
chronic steroids
Hypotension may
be mild; lethargy
and decreased level
of consciousness;
stigmata indicative
of underlying chronic
inflammatory disorder
such as rheumatoid
hands; cushingoid
appearance
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
coagulation profile):
serum electrolytes:
may be hyponatremia
and hyperkalemia,
serum BUN may be
elevated; CBC: WBC
count may be elevated
with intercurrent illness
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
Results may be
abnormal if there is
associated autoimmune
»adrenocorticotrophic
hormone
stimulation test:
low serum cortisol
pre-administration
of cosyntropin with
failure to rise after
administration (<18
micrograms/dL)
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Uncommon
Adrenal suppression (iatrogenic)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
thyroid disease or
pernicious anemia.
»ECG: normal
»morning serum
cortisol: <3
micrograms/dL
Addison disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
weight loss; anorexia;
increased pigmentation;
fatigue; nausea and
vomiting; salt craving;
dizziness
hyperpigmentation
(commonly mucous
membranes and sun-
exposed areas, more
pronounced in palmar
creases, areas of
friction, and scars)
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
coagulation profile):
serum electrolytes: may
be hyponatremia and
hyperkalemia, serum
BUN may be elevated;
CBC: may be low Hb,
eosinophilia
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
and serum vitamin
B12 (older adults
only): normal
Results may be
abnormal if there is
associated autoimmune
thyroid disease or
pernicious anemia.
»ECG: normal
»morning serum
cortisol: <3
micrograms/dL
Should be measured
between 8am and
9am when levels
are expected to be
highest.[63]
»adrenocorticotropic
hormone
stimulation test:
low serum cortisol
pre-administration
of cosyntropin with
failure to rise after
administration (<18
micrograms/dL)
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Hypopituitarism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
failure to thrive in
childhood; short
stature; failure
of secondary
characteristics;
oligomenorrhea;
infertility; headache;
visual field defects;
blurred vision
dry skin; breast
atrophy; increased body
mass index; loss of
axillary and pubic hair;
ophthalmoplegia
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
coagulation profile):
low serum sodium
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4: low
free T4, low or normal
thyroid-stimulating
hormone
»morning serum
cortisol: <3
micrograms/dL
»morning serum
testosterone, LH,
FSH (in men): all low
»morning serum
estradiol, LH, FSH (in
women): all low
»serum prolactin:
may be elevated
»adrenocorticotrophic
hormone
stimulation test:
low serum cortisol
pre-administration
of cosyntropin with
failure to rise after
administration (<18
micrograms/dL)
»serum insulin like
growth factor: low
◊ Thiamine deficiency
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
presence of suggestive
risk factors (e.g.,
alcohol abuse,
recurrent vomiting,
chronic diarrhea,
postgastrointestinal
surgery, AIDS, total
parenteral nutrition,
diet of polished rice);
fatigue; weakness;
muscle aches; reduced
peripheral sensation;
swollen legs; poor
balance; confusion;
paresthesia
peripheral edema;
reduced knee jerks
and other tendon
reflexes; severe muscle
weakness; muscle
wasting; tachycardia;
signs of Wernicke
encephalopathy
(e.g., mental state
changes such as acute
confusion, ataxia, and
ocular abnormalities
such as nystagmus and
strabismus)
»trial of thiamine
replacement
therapy: clinical
improvement may
support diagnosis
»erythrocyte
thiamine
pyrophosphate level:
reduced
Prior to starting
thiamine-replacement
therapy, a blood sample
should be taken for
erythrocyte thiamine
pyrophosphate. A good
indicator of the body
stores of thiamine,
»ABG: elevated anion
gap, metabolic acidosis
»serum lactate:
elevated
»MRI brain: Wernicke
encephalopathy:
bilateral increased
T2 signal in the
paraventricular regions
of the thalamus,
hypothalamus,
mammillary bodies,
periaqueductal region,
fourth ventricle floor,
and midline cerebellum
Not specific to the
condition.
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Thiamine deficiency
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
but tests usually take
several days for result
so treatment should not
be delayed.
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum LFTs,
coagulation profile):
CBC: macrocytosis
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4:
normal
All patients presenting
in high-output cardiac
failure should have
thyroid function tests
urgently checked to rule
out thyrotoxicosis.
»serum B12 (older
adults only): normal
»ECG: normal
◊ Vitamin B12 deficiency
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
may be known vitamin
B12 deficiency; may
be risk factors present
(e.g., elderly people,
patients with chronic
malabsorption, history
of gastric resection
or bypass, and
those taking certain
medications such as
metformin, proton
pump inhibitors); lower
limb numbness; other
parasthesia; depressed
mood
decreased vibration
sense; gait
abnormalities;
decreased peripheral
sensation; absent
ankle jerks; signs
of depression or
dementia; exam may
be normal; late signs:
angular cheilitis,
glossitis, pallor and
bruising
»basic test panel
(CBC, serum
electrolytes, blood
glucose, serum
LFTs, coagulation
profile): CBC: may
be normal but may
be low Hb, elevated
MCV, low hematocrit;
peripheral blood
smear: megalocytes,
hypersegmented
polymorphonucleated
cells
»serum vitamin B12:
<200 picograms/mL
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Vitamin B12 deficiency
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
is highly suggestive of
deficiency
This level of serum
vitamin B12 generally
confirms the diagnosis.
»serum thyroid-
stimulating
hormone, free T4
(older adults only):
normal
Unless there is
associated autoimmune
thyroid disease.
»ECG: normal
»reticulocyte
count: low corrected
reticulocyte index
◊ Carcinoid syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
associated symptoms
of flushing, diarrhea,
abdominal pain,
palpitations and
wheeze
peripheral edema
secondary to right heart
failure, tachycardia,
telangiectasia, cardiac
murmur, hepatomegaly,
wheeze, abdominal
mass
»24 hours of urinary
excretion of 5-
hydroxyindole
acetic acid: elevated
5-hydroxyindole
acetic acid is a
breakdown product of
serotonin and is almost
exclusively excreted in
the urine[93]
»CT scan chest,
abdomen and pelvis:
identifies location of
primary tumor and
presence of liver
metastases
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Online resources
Online resources
1. Resuscitation Council (UK): 2021 resuscitation guidelines (external link) (https://www.resus.org.uk/
library/2021-resuscitation-guidelines)
ONLINE RESOURCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Evidence tables
EVIDENCE TABLES
Evidence tables
What are the effects of early versus late initiation of empiric antimicrobial
treatment in adults with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis?[37]
This table is a summary of the analysis reported in a guideline (underpinned by a systematic review)
that focuses on the above important clinical question.
View the full source guideline (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51/evidence)
Evidence C *
Confidence in the evidence is very low or low where GRADE has been performed
and the intervention may be more effective/beneficial than the comparison for key
outcomes. However, this is uncertain and new evidence could change this in the
future.
Population: Adults with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis
Intervention: Early initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Comparison: Late initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
<1 hour versus >1 hour
Mortality ᵃ Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality - Intensive Care Unit
(ICU) setting
Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality - Emergency
Department (ED) setting
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<2 hours versus >2 hours
Mortality ᵃ No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Mortality - ICU setting Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality - ED setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<3 hours versus >3 hours
Mortality ᵃ Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality - ICU setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Evidence tables
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
Mortality - ED setting Favors intervention Very Low
<4 hours versus >4 hours
Mortality - ED setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<5 hours versus >5 hours
Mortality - ED setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<6 hours versus >6 hours
Mortality ᵃ Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality - ICU setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Mortality - ED setting Favours intervention Very Low
Recommendations as stated in the source guideline
The guideline committee recommends that adults, children and young people over the age of 12 who have
suspected sepsis and one or more high-risk criteria, should be given a broad-spectrum antimicrobial at the
maximum recommended dose without delay (within 1 hour of establishing they meet high-risk criteria in an
acute hospital s e t t i n g ) . ᵇ  See guideline for details on criteria for different levels of risk.
Note
Results in this table are based on observational studies only.
ᵃ  Includes overall mortality in intensive care and emergency department settings.
ᵇ  This guideline recommends that all people with suspected sepsis have a face-to-face assessment and a
risk stratification tool is used to determine risk of severe illness and death from sepsis. Recommendations
depend on the presence and number of high-, moderate-to-high, and low-risk criteria.
EVIDENCE TABLES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Evidence tables
EVIDENCE TABLES
What are the effects of early versus late initiation of empiric antimicrobial
treatment in children with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis?[37]
This table is a summary of the analysis reported in a guideline (underpinned by a systematic review)
that focuses on the above important clinical question.
View the full source guideline (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51/evidence)
Evidence C *
Confidence in the evidence is very low or low where GRADE has been performed
and the intervention may be more effective/beneficial than the comparison for key
outcomes. However, this is uncertain and new evidence could change this in the
future.
Population: Children with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis
Intervention: Early initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Comparison: Late initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
<1 hour versus >1 hour ᵃ 
 Pediatric Intensive Care Unit
(PICU) mortality
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<2 hours versus >2 hours ᵃ 
 PICU mortality No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<3 hours versus >3 hours ᵃ 
 PICU mortality Favors intervention Very Low
<4 hours versus >4 hours ᵃ 
 PICU mortality Favors intervention Very Low
Recommendations as stated in the source guideline
The National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 2016 guideline on Sepsis: recognition, diagnosis
and early management makes the following recommendation:
For children aged 5–11 years who have suspected sepsis and 1 or more high-risk criteria, give a broad-
spectrum antimicrobial ᵇ  at the maximum recommended dose without delay (within 1 hour of identifying that
they meet any high-risk criteria in an acute hospital setting).
Note
The guideline group noted that the direct evidence in children came from one small (n=130), single-
centre retrospective study of children in PICU with severe sepsis and septic shock. Therefore, they also
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Evidence tables
extrapolated from the indirect evidence in adults to make the same recommendation for all age groups
(including children aged under 5 years and 5-11 years).
ᵃ  Time from sepsis recognition to initial treatment and first appropriate treatment.
ᵇ  See full guideline for more information.
* Evidence levels
The Evidence level is an internal rating applied by BMJ Best Practice. See the EBM Toolkit (https://
bestpractice.bmj.com/info/evidence-tables/) for details.
Confidence in evidence
A -  High or moderate to high
B -  Moderate or low to moderate
C -  Very low or low
† Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
Based on statistical significance, which demonstrates that the results are unlikely to be due to chance, but
which does not necessarily translate to a clinical significance.
‡ Grade certainty ratings
High The authors are very confident that the true
effect is similar to the estimated effect.
Moderate The authors are moderately confident that
the true effect is likely to be close to the
estimated effect.
Low The authors have limited confidence in the
effect estimate and the true effect may be
substantially different.
Very Low The authors have very little confidence in
the effect estimate and the true effect is
likely to be substantially different.
BMJ Best Practice EBM Toolkit: What is GRADE? (https://bestpractice.bmj.com/info/toolkit/learn-ebm/what-
is-grade/)
EVIDENCE TABLES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Evaluation of hypotension References
REFERENCES
Key articles
• Brignole M, Moya A, de Lange FJ, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
syncope. Eur Heart J. 2018 Jun 1;39(21):1883-948.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/
article/39/21/1883/4939241)
• McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment
of acute and chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2021 Sep 21;42(36):3599-726.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/36/3599/6358045)
• Society of Critical Care Medicine; European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Surviving Sepsis
Campaign: hour-1 bundle: initial resuscitation for sepsis and septic shock. 2019 [internet publication]. 
Full text (https://www.sccm.org/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines)
• Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management
of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association joint
committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2022 May 3;145(18):e895-1032.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001063)   Abstract
References
1. Gibson SJ, Helme RD. Age-related differences in pain perception and report. Clin Geriatr
Med. 2001 Aug;17(3):433-56, v-vi. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11459714?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Sigurdsson E, Thorgeirsson G, Sigvaldason N. Unrecognised myocardial infarction: epidemiology,
clinical characteristics and the prognostic role of angina pectoris. The Reykjavik Study. Ann
Intern Med. 1995 Jan 15;122(2):96-102. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7993002?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Ishigami J, Charleston J, Miller ER 3rd, et al. Effects of cuff size on the accuracy of blood pressure
readings: the cuff(SZ) randomized crossover trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2023 Oct 1;183(10):1061-8. 
Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10407761)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37548984?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Frith J. Diagnosing orthostatic hypotension: a narrative review of the evidence. Br Med Bull.
2015 Sep;115(1):123-34.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1093/bmb/ldv025)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25995335?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. McEvoy JW, McCarthy CP, Bruno RM, et al. 2024 ESC guidelines for the management of elevated
blood pressure and hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2024 Oct 7;45(38):3912-4018.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/45/38/3912/7741010)
62 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 63 ===
Evaluation of hypotension References
6. Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, et al. Consensus statement on the definition of orthostatic
hypotension, neurally mediated syncope and the postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Auton Res. 2011
Apr;21(2):69-72. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21431947?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Haerlein J, Dassen T, Halfens RJ, et al. Fall risk factors in older people with dementia or
cognitive impairment: a systematic review. J Adv Nurs. 2009 May;65(5):922-33. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19291191?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Corsinovi L, Bo M, Ricauda- Aimonino N, et al. Outcomes in elderly patients admitted to an acute
geriatric unit. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 009 Jul-Aug;49(1):142-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18674824?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Rose BD, Post TW. Hypovolemic states. In: Clinical physiology of acid-base and electrolyte disorders.
5th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2001:415-46.
10. McGee S, Abernethy WB 3rd, Simel DL. The rational clinical examination: is this patient
hypovolemic? JAMA. 1999;281:1022-1029. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10086438?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Portilla D, Andreoli TE. Disorders of extracellular volume. In: Johnson RJ, Feehally J, eds.
Comprehensive clinical nephrology. London: Mosby International; 2007:77-91.
12. Gitz Holler J, Jensen HK, Henriksen DP, et al. Etiology of shock in the emergency department:
A 12-year population-based cohort study. Shock. 2019 Jan;51(1):60-67.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1097/SHK.0000000000000816)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27984523?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Hochman JS. Cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction: expanding the
paradigm. Circulation. 2003 Jun 24;107(24):2998-3002.  Full text (https://circ.ahajournals.org/
content/107/24/2998.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12821585?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Standl T, Annecke T, Cascorbi I, et al. The nomenclature, definition and distinction
of types of shock. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2018 Nov 9;115(45):757-768.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.2018.0757)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30573009?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Hines OJ, Pandol SJ. Management of severe acute pancreatitis. BMJ. 2019 Dec 2;367:l6227.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l6227)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31791953?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Brignole M, Moya A, de Lange FJ, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
syncope. Eur Heart J. 2018 Jun 1;39(21):1883-948.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/
article/39/21/1883/4939241)
17. Asplund CA, O'Connor F G, Noakes TD. Exercise-associated collapse: an evidence-based
review and primer for clinicians. Br J Sports Med. 2011 Nov;45(14):1157-62.  Full text (http://
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
63
=== Page 64 ===
Evaluation of hypotension References
REFERENCES
bjsm.bmj.com/content/45/14/1157.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21948122?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Cecconi M, De Backer D, Antonelli M, et al. Consensus on circulatory shock and hemodynamic
monitoring. Task force of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care Med. 2014
Dec;40(12):1795-815.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1007/s00134-014-3525-z)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25392034?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. O'Driscoll BR, Howard LS, Earis J, et al. BTS guideline for oxygen use in adults in healthcare and
emergency settings. Thorax. 2017 Jun;72(suppl 1):ii1-90.  Full text (https://spiral.imperial.ac.uk/
bitstream/10044/1/58263/2/Final%20Document.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28507176?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Hasler RM, Nuesch E, Jüni P, et al. Systolic blood pressure below 110 mmHg is associated
with increased mortality in blunt major trauma patients: multicentre cohort study. Resuscitation.
2011 Sep;82(9):1202-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21632168?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Wada H, Matsumoto T, Yamashita Y, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC) according to four DIC guidelines. J Intensive Care. 2014 Feb 20;2(1):15.  Full text
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4267589)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25520831?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Innerhofer P, Fries D, Mittermayr M, et al. Reversal of trauma-induced coagulopathy using first-
line coagulation factor concentrates or fresh frozen plasma (RETIC): a single-centre, parallel-
group, open-label, randomised trial. Lancet Haematol. 2017 Jun;4(6):e258-71. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28457980?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Papageorgiou C, Jourdi G, Adjambri E, et al. Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation: An Update
on Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Therapeutic Strategies. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 2018
Dec;24(9_suppl):8S-28S.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1177/1076029618806424)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30296833?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Pollack CV Jr, Reilly PA, van Ryn J, et al. Idarucizumab for dabigatran reversal: full cohort analysis.
N Engl J Med. 2017 Aug 3;377(5):431-41. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28693366?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Gayet-Ageron A, Prieto-Merino D, Ker K, et al. Effect of treatment delay on the effectiveness and
safety of antifibrinolytics in acute severe haemorrhage: a meta-analysis of individual patient-level
data from 40 138 bleeding patients. Lancet. 2018 Jan 13;391(10116):125-32.  Full text (http://
www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(17)32455-8/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29126600?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Chu DK, Kim LH, Young PJ, et al. Mortality and morbidity in acutely ill adults treated with liberal
versus conservative oxygen therapy (IOTA): a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet.
2018 Apr 28;391(10131):1693-1705. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29726345?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 65 ===
Evaluation of hypotension References
27. O'Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-
elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2013 Jul 1;82(1):E1-27.  Full
text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/127/4/e362.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23247304?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment
of acute and chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2021 Sep 21;42(36):3599-726.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/36/3599/6358045)
29. Stein PD, Gottschalk A, Saltzman MA, et al. Diagnosis of acute pulmonary embolism in the elderly. J
Am Coll Cardiol. 1991 Nov 15;18(6):1452-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1939945?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Panchal AR, Bartos JA, Cabañas JG, et al. Part 3: Adult basic and advanced life support:
2020 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency
cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2020 Oct 20;142(16_suppl_2):S366-468.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000916)
31. Perman SM, Elmer J, Maciel CB, et al. 2023 American Heart Association focused update on adult
advanced cardiovascular life support: an update to the American Heart Association guidelines
for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2024 Jan
30;149(5):e254-73.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001194)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38108133?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. American College of Surgeons. Advanced Trauma Life Support Student Course Manual. 2018 10th
edition. 2018 [internet publication].
33. National Patient Safety Agency. Alert: Blood control safety cannula and needle thoracostomy for
tension pneumothorax. April 2020 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.england.nhs.uk/
publication/national-patient-safety-alert-blood-control-safety-cannula-and-needle-thoracostomy-for-
tension-pneumothorax)
34. Leigh-Smith S, Harris T. Tension pneumothorax - time for a re-think? Emerg Med J.
2005 Jan;22(1):8-16.  Full text (http://emj.bmj.com/content/22/1/8.long)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15611534?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Jones R, Hollingsworth J. Tension pneumothoraces not responding to needle thoracocentesis.
Emerg Med J. 2002 Mar;19(2):176-7.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1725828/pdf/v019p00176.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11904276?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The third international consensus definitions
for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA. 2016 Feb 23;315(8):801-10.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4968574)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/26903338?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
65
=== Page 66 ===
Evaluation of hypotension References
REFERENCES
37. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Suspected sepsis: recognition, diagnosis and early
management. Mar 2024 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51)
38. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international
guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock 2021. Crit Care Med. 2021 Nov
1;49(11):e1063-143.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/fulltext/2021/11000/
surviving_sepsis_campaign__international.21.aspx)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34605781?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Warmerdam M, Baris L, van Liebergen M, et al. The association between systolic blood pressure
and in-hospital mortality in older emergency department patients who are hospitalised with a
suspected infection. Emerg Med J. 2018 Oct;35(10):619-622.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1136/
emermed-2018-207502)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29982193?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Royal College of Physicians. National Early Warning Score (NEWS) 2. December 2017 [internet
publication].  Full text (https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/outputs/national-early-warning-score-
news-2)
41. American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) Expert Panel on Sepsis. DART: an evidence-
driven tool to guide the early recognition and treatment of sepsis and septic shock [internet
publication].  Full text (https://poctools.acep.org/POCTool/Sepsis(DART)/276ed0a9-f24d-45f1-8d0c-
e908a2758e5a)
42. Academy of Medical Royal Colleges. Statement on the initial antimicrobial treatment of sepsis. Oct
2022 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.aomrc.org.uk/reports-guidance)
43. Schlapbach LJ, Watson RS, Sorce LR, et al. International consensus criteria for pediatric
sepsis and septic shock. JAMA. 2024 Jan 21.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/journals/
jama/fullarticle/2814297)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38245889?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Society of Critical Care Medicine; European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Surviving Sepsis
Campaign: hour-1 bundle: initial resuscitation for sepsis and septic shock. 2019 [internet publication]. 
Full text (https://www.sccm.org/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines)
45. Resuscitation Council UK. Guidance: Anaphylaxis. 2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
www.resus.org.uk/library/additional-guidance/guidance-anaphylaxis)
46. European Resuscitation Council. ERC Guidelines. 2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
cprguidelines.eu)
47. Rushworth RL, Torpy DJ, Falhammar H. Adrenal Crisis. N Engl J Med. 2019 Aug
29;381(9):852-61.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMra1807486?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31461595?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 67 ===
Evaluation of hypotension References
48. Pinsky MR. Hemodynamic evaluation and monitoring in the ICU. Chest. 2007 Dec;132(6):2020-9.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18079239?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Rady MY, Rivers EP, Nowak RM. Resuscitation of the critically ill in the ED: responses of
blood pressure, heart rate, shock index, central venous oxygen saturation, and lactate. Am J
Emerg Med. 1996 Mar;14(2):218-25. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8924150?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Monnet X, Marik P, Teboul JL. Passive leg raising for predicting fluid responsiveness: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med. 2016 Dec;42(12):1935-47. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26825952?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Marik PE, Lemson J. Fluid responsiveness: an evolution of our understanding. Br J Anaesth. 2014
Apr;112(4):617-20.  Full text (https://bjanaesthesia.org/article/S0007-0912(17)30874-7/fulltext)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24535603?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Atkinson P, Bowra J, Milne J, et al. International Federation for Emergency Medicine Consensus
Statement: Sonography in hypotension and cardiac arrest (SHoC): An international consensus
on the use of point of care ultrasound for undifferentiated hypotension and during cardiac arrest.
CJEM. 2017 Nov;19(6):459-70.  Full text (https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/canadian-
journal-of-emergency-medicine/article/international-federation-for-emergency-medicine-consensus-
statement-sonography-in-hypotension-and-cardiac-arrest-shoc-an-international-consensus-
on-the-use-of-point-of-care-ultrasound-for-undifferentiated-hypotension-and-during-cardiac-
arrest/1220D0A3B853EE22B6FB0294F1CD0D67/core-reader)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27998322?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Atkinson PR, Milne J, Diegelmann L, et al. Does point-of-care ultrasonography improve
clinical outcomes in emergency department patients with undifferentiated hypotension? An
international randomized controlled trial from the SHoC-ED investigators. Ann Emerg Med. 2018
Oct;72(4):478-489.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.annemergmed.2018.04.002)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29866583?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Warren J, Moazzez A, Chong V, et al. Narrowed pulse pressure predicts massive transfusion
and emergent operative intervention following penetrating trauma. Am J Surg. 2019
Dec;218(6):1185-1188.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2019.08.022)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31551145?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Reynolds HR, Hochman JS. Cardiogenic shock: current concepts and improving outcomes.
Circulation. 2008 Feb 5;117(5):686-97.  Full text (https://circ.ahajournals.org/content/117/5/686.full)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18250279?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Clinch D, Banerjee AK, Ostick G. Absence of abdominal pain in elderly patients with peptic ulcer
disease. Age Ageing. 1984 Mar;13(2):120-3. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6731166?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Liston R, McLoughlin R, Clinch D. Acute pneumothorax: A comparison of elderly with younger
patients. Age Ageing. 1994 Sep;23(5):393-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7825485?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
67
=== Page 68 ===
Evaluation of hypotension References
REFERENCES
58. Kuipers J, Verboom LM, Ipema KJR, et al. The prevalence of intradialytic hypotension in
patients on conventional hemodialysis: A systematic review with meta-analysis. Am J Nephrol.
2019;49(6):497-506.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1159/000500877)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31129661?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Kamaruzzaman S, Watt H, Carson C, et al. The association between orthostatic hypotension and
medication use in the British Women's Heart and Health Study. Age Ageing. 2010 Jan;39(1):51-6.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19897539?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Wynne HA, Schofield S. Drug-induced orthostatic hypotension. In: Kenny RA ,ed. Syncope in the older
patient: causes, investigations and consequences of syncope and falls. London: Chapman & Hall.
1996:137-54.
61. Maxwell EN, Johnson B, Cammilleri J, et al. Intravenous acetaminophen-induced hypotension: A
review of the current literature. Ann Pharmacother. 2019 Oct;53(10):1033-1041.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1177/1060028019849716)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31046402?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management
of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2022 May 3;145(18):e895-1032.  Full
text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001063)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35363499?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Hanna FWF, Issa BG, Kevil B, et al. Investigating cortisol excess or deficiency: a practical approach.
BMJ. 2019 Nov 26;367:l6039.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.l6039)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31771937?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Anaphylaxis: assessment and referral after
emergency treatment. Aug 2020 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
cg134)
65. Kusminsky RE. Complications of central venous catheterization. J Am Coll Surg.
2007 Apr;204(4):681-96. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17382229?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. McGee DC, Gould MK. Preventing complications of central venous catheterization. N Engl J Med.
2003 Mar 20;348(12):1123-33.  Full text (http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMra011883)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12646670?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Smith RN, Nolan JP. Central venous catheters. BMJ. 2013 Nov 11;347:f6570.  Full text (https://
www.bmj.com/content/347/bmj.f6570.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24217269?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. Reich DL. Monitoring in anesthesia and perioperative care. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press;
2011.
68 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 69 ===
Evaluation of hypotension References
69. Abbott Northwestern Hospital Internal Medicine Residency. Internal jugular central venous line. 2022
[internet publication].  Full text (http://www.anwresidency.com/simulation/guide/ij.html)
70. Bishop L, Dougherty L, Bodenham A, et al. Guidelines on the insertion and management of central
venous access devices in adults. Int J Lab Hematol. 2007 Aug;29(4):261-78. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17617077?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
71. Practice guidelines for central venous access 2020: an updated report by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Central Venous Access. Anesthesiology. 2020 Jan;132(1):8-43.  Full
text (https://www.doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000002864)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31821240?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Fletcher SJ, Bodenham AR. Safe placement of central venous catheters: where should the tip
of the catheter lie? Br J Anaesth. 2000 Aug;85(2):188-91. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10992821?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Gibson F, Bodenham A. Misplaced central venous catheters: applied anatomy and practical
management. Br J Anaesth. 2013 Mar;110(3):333-46.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
bja/article/110/3/333/249469)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23384735?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74. Schuster M, Nave H, Piepenbrock S, et al. The carina as a landmark in central venous catheter
placement. Br J Anaesth. 2000 Aug;85(2):192-4. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10992822?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
75. Webster J, Osborne S, Rickard CM, et al. Clinically-indicated replacement versus routine replacement
of peripheral venous catheters. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Jan 23;(1):CD007798.  Full text
(https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD007798.pub5/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30671926?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. Simundic AM, Bölenius K, Cadamuro J, et al. Joint EFLM-COLABIOCLI recommendation for venous
blood sampling. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2018;56(12):2015-38. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30004902?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
77. Wieling W, Thijs RD, van Dijk N, et al. Symptoms and signs of syncope: a review of the link
between physiology and clinical clues. Brain. 2009 Oct;132(Pt 10):2630-42. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19587129?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
78. Bannister R. Chronic autonomic failure with postural hypotension. Lancet. 1979 Aug 25;2(8139):404-6.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/89459?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
79. Mathias CJ, Bannister R. Clinical features and evaluation of the primary chronic autonomic failure
syndromes. In: Bannister R, Mathias CJ eds. Autonomic failure: A textbook of clinical disorders of the
autonomic nervous system. 4th ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press;1999:562
80. Wang AK, Fealey RD, Gehrking TL, et al. Patterns of neuropathy and autonomic failure in patients
with amyloidosis. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008 Nov;83(11):1226-30.  Full text (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
69
=== Page 70 ===
Evaluation of hypotension References
REFERENCES
pmc/articles/PMC2842947)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18990321?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
81. Hiorth YH, Pedersen KF, Dalen I, et al. Orthostatic hypotension in Parkinson disease: A 7-year
prospective population-based study. Neurology. 2019 Oct 15;93(16):e1526-e1534.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000008314)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31527282?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82. Moore A, Ryan J, Watts M et al. Orthostatic tolerance in older patients with vitamin B12 deficiency
before and after vitamin B12 replacement. Clin Auton Res. 2004 Apr;14(2):67-71. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15095047?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
83. Sarasin FP, Louis-Simonet M, Caraballo D, et al. Prevalence of orthostatic hypotension among
patients with syncope in the ED. Am J Emerg Med. 2002 Oct;20(6):497-501. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12369019?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
84. Kenny RA, Richardson DA. Carotid sinus syndrome and falls in older adults. Am J Geriatr
Cardiol. 2001 Mar-Apr;10(2):97-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11253467?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
85. Kenny RA, Bayliss J, Ingram A, et al. Head-Up tilt table testing: a useful test for investigating
unexplained falls. Lancet. 1986;i:1352-54.
86. Kearney F, Moore A, Donegan C. Orthostatic hypotension in older adults. Rev Clin Gerontol.
2007;17(4):259-75.
87. Batlle D, Chen S, Haque S. Physiological principles in the clinical evaluation of electrolyte, water,
and acid-base disorders. In: Alpern RJ, Caplan MJ, Moe OW, eds. Seldin and Giebisch's the kidney:
physiology and pathophysiology. 5th ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2012:2477-512.
88. Oakland K, Chadwick G, East JE, et al. Diagnosis and management of acute lower gastrointestinal
bleeding: guidelines from the British Society of Gastroenterology. Gut. 2019 May;68(5):776-89. 
Full text (https://gut.bmj.com/content/68/5/776.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30792244?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
89. Siegel CL, Cohan RH, Korobkin M, et al. Abdominal aortic aneurysm morphology: CT features in
patients with ruptured and nonruptured aneurysms. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1994 Nov;163(5):1123-9. 
Full text (http://www.ajronline.org/doi/pdf/10.2214/ajr.163.5.7976888)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7976888?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
90. Dent B, Kendall RJ, Boyle AA, et al. Emergency ultrasound of the abdominal aorta by UK emergency
physicians: a prospective cohort study. Emerg Med J. 2007 Aug;24(8):547-9. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17652674?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
91. Rompianesi G, Hann A, Komolafe O, et al. Serum amylase and lipase and urinary trypsinogen
and amylase for diagnosis of acute pancreatitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Apr
21;4:CD012010.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD012010.pub2)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28431198?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 71 ===
Evaluation of hypotension References
92. The PIOPED Investigators. Value of the ventilation/perfusion scan in acute pulmonary embolism.
Results of the prospective investigation of pulmonary embolism diagnosis (PIOPED). JAMA.
1990 May 23-30;263(20):2753-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2332918?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
93. Hassan SA, Banchs J, Iliescu C, et al. Carcinoid heart disease. Heart. 2017 Oct;103(19):1488-95.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28596302?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
71
=== Page 72 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Images
IMAGES
Images
Figure 1: Summary of assessment in a hypotensive adult
Created by The BMJ Group
72 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 73 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Images
Figure 2: ECG demonstrating episode of paroxysmal atrial tachycardia in a 35-year-old with history of recent
cocaine use
From the collection of Sarah Stahmer, MD, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC; used with
permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
73
=== Page 74 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Images
IMAGES
Figure 3: Chronic illness presenting with hypotension based on patient age
Created by The BMJ Group
74 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 75 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Images
Figure 4: Plantar ulcer in a patient with type 1 diabetes
From the collection of Rodica Pop-Busui, University of Michigan, MI; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
75
=== Page 76 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
76 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 77 ===
Evaluation of hypotension Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 29, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
77
=== Page 78 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Fiona Kearney, MB, BCh, BAO, MRCPI
Consultant Geriatrician
Department of Healthcare of Older People, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Queen’s Medical
Centre, Nottingham, UK
DISCLOSURES: FK is an author of a reference cited in this topic.
Alan Moore, MB, BCh, BAO, FRCPI
Consultant Geriatrician
Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Honorary Senior Lecturer at Royal College of Surgeons, Ireland Medical
School, Dublin, Republic of Ireland
DISCLOSURES: AM is an author of a number of references cited in this topic.
// Peer Reviewers:
Vidhu S. Paliwal, MD
Cardiologist
Skagit Valley Hospital, Mount Vernon, WA
DISCLOSURES: VSP declares that he has no competing interests.
Gideon Caplan, MB, BS Syd, FRACP
Director
Geriatric Medicine, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia
DISCLOSURES: GC declares that he has no competing interests.
Vasi Naganathan, MBBS, FRACP, MMed (Clin Epi), PhD, Grad Cert Med Ed
Academic Sydney Medical School
University of Sydney, Consultant Geriatrician, Concord Hospital Centre for Education and Research on
Ageing, Concord, Australia
DISCLOSURES: VN declares that he has no competing interests.
Andrew Parfitt, MBBS, FFAEM
Clinical Director
Acute Medicine, Associate Medical Director, Consultant Emergency Medicine, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS
Foundation Trust, Clinical Lead and Consultant, Accident Emergency Medicine, St Thomas' Hospital,
London, UK
DISCLOSURES: AP declares that he has no competing interests.
