# Evaluation of shock

=== Page 1 ===
Evaluation of shock
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Feb 13, 2025
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Theory  4
Etiology  4
Emergencies  6
Urgent considerations  6
Diagnosis  11
Approach  11
Differentials overview  16
Differentials  18
Evidence tables  31
References  35
Images  44
Disclaimer  46
=== Page 3 ===
Evaluation of shock Overview
Summary
Shock is best defined as a state of reduced end-organ oxygenation caused by an imbalance between tissue
oxygen delivery and demand resulting in an oxygen debt.
Oxygen delivery is determined by cardiac output, vascular integrity, and oxygen content of the blood. Oxygen
content is a composite of hemoglobin and arterial oxygen saturation, and the cardiac output is a product of
stroke volume and heart rate. Stroke volume is affected by preload (filling), left ventricular contractility (pump
function), and afterload as measured by the systemic vascular resistance.
Differences in the preload, afterload, and contractility generally differentiate the etiologies of shock. These
are broadly classified into hypovolemic, cardiogenic, obstructive, and distributive types.[1]
Basic pathophysiology
Shock is characterized by release of cytokines and other inflammatory mediators that cause a systemic
inflammatory response syndrome mediated by tissue hypoxia. This causes alterations in flow at the level of
the microcirculation that can usually be reversed by intravascular volume resuscitation and, as appropriate,
vasopressor and inotropic support.[2] [3] [4]
Outcome
Shock comprises an early reversible stage of compensated shock where the body's homeostatic
mechanisms compensate for decreased perfusion by increasing the rate and force of contraction of
the heart, initially maintaining arterial blood pressure. The circulation is centralized, due to peripheral
vasoconstriction, so that blood flow to non-vital organs (commonly skin) is reduced. Respiratory rate
increases to compensate for metabolic acidosis and urine output falls (to conserve fluid volume) as a
result of release of antidiuretic hormone from the posterior pituitary. These adaptive responses may not be
apparent to the casual observer. Unrecognized, this evolves to overt shock manifested by decreased blood
pressure and altered mental status attributable to reduced cerebral blood flow. This usually occurs in the
setting of an effective loss ≥30% of plasma volume and/or cardiac index of <2.2 L/minute/m². Untreated at
this stage, it can cause irreversible cell death and organ damage.
The lack of tissue oxygenation leads to accumulation of products of anaerobic metabolism such as lactate.
Significant tissue hypoxia leads to a systemic proinflammatory state with excess cytokine release; when
prolonged (>6 to 12 hours) this causes irreversible cellular damage. This is clinically manifest as multiorgan
dysfunction/failure with increased mortality.
Mortality from shock varies between 23% and 70%, depending on the type of shock and the duration of
tissue hypoperfusion.[5] [6] [7][8] [9]
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Evaluation of shock Theory
THEORY
Etiology
Shock can be classified into four major types.
Hypovolemic
Associated with decreased cardiac preload (blood return to the right ventricle due to low vascular volume),
which could be due to:
Hemorrhage
• Overt, as in gastrointestinal bleeding or trauma
• Concealed, such as aortic aneurysm rupture, retroperitoneal bleeding, soft tissue bleeding associated
with long-bone fractures, or traumatic body cavity bleeds.
Fluid depletion
• Gastrointestinal losses, such as diarrhea, vomiting
• Insensible losses, such as burns
• Third-space losses, such as major surgery, pancreatitis, intestinal obstruction
• Excessive heat or exercise exposure without fluid replacement.
Decreased preload results in decreased cardiac output due to ineffective heart filling. The physiologic
reaction to this condition is diversion of blood from the splanchnic (peripheral) circulation areas to vital
organs by increasing systemic vascular resistance (SVR).
Cardiogenic
Results from heart pump dysfunction (more commonly left-sided) causing a decrease in cardiac output.
Compensatory surges in catecholamines lead to increased SVR. However, in some instances (especially
acute coronary syndrome), decreased SVR may be observed.[10] [11] Early, aggressive management can
lead to improved outcome.[12] Myocardial infarction, viral and alcoholic cardiomyopathies, congestive heart
failure, and cardiac valvular lesions are some of the main contributors.
Patients with a history of hypertension or heart disease who are being treated with a beta-blocker, a calcium-
channel blocker, or a class 1c antiarrhythmic such as flecainide may be at risk due to pharmacologic
suppression of cardiac contractility and alteration of electrical depolarization of automatic myocardial
contraction mechanisms.
Obstructive
Secondary to an obstruction to cardiac flow or filling
• Flow restriction: pulmonary embolism or severe pulmonary hypertension. Usually accompanied by
decreased oxygenation with very minimal physical signs.
• Filling restriction: cardiac tamponade or tension pneumothorax. Classically cardiac tamponade
presents with elevated jugular venous pressure, muffled heart sounds, and low blood pressure. Pulsus
paradoxus or electrical alternans may also be apparent. Physical findings with tension pneumothorax
may include decreased unilateral breath sounds, hyper-resonance to percussion on the affected
side, and tracheal deviation to the opposite side from the pneumothorax. These conditions require
immediate attention.
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Evaluation of shock Theory
Distributive
This is associated with significant vasodilation resulting in relative hypovolemia (decreased cardiac preload)
and decreased SVR. The classic description of distributive shock includes an elevated cardiac output.
However, in a substantial percentage of septic shock patients with secondary distributive shock, depression
of cardiac contractility is observed.[13] Causes of distributive shock include sepsis, neurogenic shock,
adrenal insufficiency, anaphylaxis, thiamine deficiency, and arterial-venous fistula.
Combination
While the above classification can guide evaluation, a combination of the above processes can coexist.
For example, septic shock may include a cardiogenic component (myocardial depression), an obstructive
component (disseminated intravascular coagulation with systemic microthrombosis), and a hypovolemic
element (diffuse capillary leak).[11]
Nevertheless, the goals of resuscitation are the same for any type of shock: restoring oxygen delivery and
reversing the tissue oxygen debt, thus normalizing mixed venous oxygen levels (SVO₂). Timely resuscitation,
restoring the circulating volume, and addressing the underlying cause for shock leads to much improved
outcomes.[12] [14] [15] [16]
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Evaluation of shock Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
Urgent considerations
(See  Differentials  for more details)
Hypovolemic shock
Loss of body fluid volume due to forms of dehydration such as hyperthermia, burns, excess diuresis,
prolonged diarrhea, or lack of usual physiologic oral fluid replacement requires fluid replacement either orally
or intravenously.
The intravenous use of a balanced crystalloid solution (e.g., lactated Ringer's [also known as Hartmann
solution]) or normal saline is appropriate for resuscitation in a patient with hypovolemic shock. Compared
with normal saline, balanced crystalloids were associated with a modestly reduced rate of a composite
outcome (of death from any cause, new renal replacement therapy, persistent renal dysfunction) in one
randomized trial of critically ill patients.[17] Colloid solutions are more expensive than crystalloid solutions
and, for vascular volume replacement, have not shown superiority over crystalloids.[18]
Bleeding from any cause requires immediate measures to control the source of the bleeding. Volume
resuscitation in the form of blood and fluid needs to be instituted immediately.[19] Bleeding following major
trauma requires coagulation support and monitoring, and the appropriate use of local hemostatic measures,
tourniquets, calcium, desmopressin, and consideration for tranexamic acid.[20] When indicated, appropriate
and immediate surgical intervention to control hemorrhage is associated with increased survival and less
disability.[20][21]
Tranexamic acid has been shown to reduce mortality in trauma patients with hemorrhage when given within
3 hours of injury.[22] [23] One meta-analysis found that delays in administration of tranexamic acid were
associated with reduced survival (survival benefit decreasing by about 10% for every 15 minutes of treatment
delay until 3 hours, after which there was no benefit) in patients with traumatic bleeding or postpartum
hemorrhage.[24]
Some patients may require embolization of bleeding vessels by interventional radiology or exploratory
surgery to accomplish hemostasis. Coagulopathies may result due to high-volume blood transfusion
(deficient in clotting factors) or consumption of clotting factors due to continued bleeding. This can be
corrected with fresh frozen plasma and platelets according to local guidelines.
Cardiogenic shock
Immediate management of myocardial infarction includes revascularization and anticoagulation, either by
primary angioplasty or, where these modalities are not available, by thrombolysis and immediate transport to
a facility with revascularization capability.[25] [26] [27]
In primary angioplasty, drug-eluting stents reduce target vessel revascularization compared with bare metal
stents.[28] A subanalysis of the SHOCK trial comparing patients treated with coronary artery bypass grafting
versus primary angioplasty found no difference in survival or disability outcome.[26]
Acute heart failure may necessitate respiratory support, such as noninvasive or invasive mechanical
ventilation, and urgent diuresis or nitrate therapy. Inotropic agents and vasodilator strategies may be
used in the appropriate setting. Pure inotropes are not mandatory in this case, unless significant cardiac
hypocontractility is demonstrated or suspected.[29] 
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Evaluation of shock Emergencies
Mechanical measures such as inserting an intra-aortic balloon pump may also be considered in patients
who are unstable following myocardial infarction or cardiac surgery. The intra-aortic balloon pump augments
blood pressure and coronary perfusion by inflating during diastole and deflating during systole.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may be considered for the management of appropriately
selected patients with cardiogenic shock.[25] [30]
Obstructive shock
Tension pneumothorax is a possible diagnosis in patients with chest trauma, young people with a previous
history of pneumothorax, or patients who exhibit signs of hypotension and hypoxia with unilaterally
decreased breath sounds. These findings usually mandate immediate needle thoracostomy drainage
followed by a formal chest drain.
Patients with hemodynamic compromise and clinical findings suggestive of pericardial tamponade (Beck
triad of muffled heart sounds, jugular venous distention, and bradycardia) need urgent evaluation with
echocardiography and pericardiocentesis.
Pulmonary embolism is a consideration in patients with recent surgery and immobilization; treatment usually
includes anticoagulation, thrombolysis (if there are no absolute contraindications), or rarely surgical or
mechanical clot removal.
Distributive shock
Results in inadequate tissue perfusion; comprises anaphylaxis, septic shock, and neurogenic shock.
Anaphylactic shock
May present after exposure to new foods, drugs, blood transfusions, rashes, bites, and stings, and is
often associated with bronchospasm. All potentially offending agents should be stopped. In patients with
hypotension and signs of anaphylactic shock, intramuscular epinephrine should be given immediately.[31][32]
[33]
Septic shock
Sepsis is a spectrum of disease, where there is a systemic and dysregulated host response to an
infection.[34] Presentation may range from subtle, nonspecific symptoms (e.g., feeling unwell with a normal
temperature), to severe symptoms with evidence of multiorgan dysfunction and septic shock. Patients may
have signs of tachycardia, tachypnea, hypotension, fever or hypothermia, poor capillary refill, mottled or
ashen skin, cyanosis, newly altered mental state, or reduced urine output.[35] Sepsis and septic shock are
medical emergencies.
The Third International Consensus Group (Sepsis-3) defines septic shock as a subset of sepsis in
which profound circulatory, cellular, and metabolic abnormalities are associated with a greater risk of
mortality than with sepsis alone. Both of the following criteria should be present (despite adequate volume
resuscitation):[34]
• Persistent hypotension requiring vasopressors to maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) ≥65 mmHg,
and
• serum lactate >18 mg/dL (>2 mmol/L).
EMERGENCIES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Evaluation of shock Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
Risk factors for sepsis include: age under 1 year, age over 75 years, frailty, impaired immunity (e.g., due to
illness or drugs), recent surgery, or other invasive procedures, any breach of skin integrity (e.g., cuts, burns),
intravenous drug misuse, indwelling lines or catheters, and pregnancy or recent pregnancy.[35]
Early recognition of sepsis is essential because early treatment improves outcomes.[35] [36][Evidence
C] [Evidence C] However, detection can be challenging because the clinical presentation of sepsis can
be subtle and nonspecific. A low threshold for suspecting sepsis is therefore important. The key to early
recognition is the systematic identification of any patient who has signs or symptoms suggestive of infection
and who is at risk of deterioration due to organ dysfunction. 
Several risk stratification approaches have been proposed. All rely on a structured clinical assessment and
recording of the patient’s vital signs.[35] [37] [38][39] It is important to check local guidance for information on
which approach your institution recommends. The timeline of ensuing investigations and treatment should be
guided by this early assessment.[39]
Sepsis screening tools are designed to promote the early identification of sepsis and consist of manual
methods or automated use of the electronic health record (EHR). These include the Sequential (or
Sepsis-related) Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score, the quick SOFA (qSOFA) criteria, National
Early Warning Score (NEWS), and Modified Early Warning Score (MEWS). There is wide variation in the
diagnostic accuracy of these tools, but they are an important component of identifying sepsis early for timely
intervention.[36]
The Third International Consensus Group (Sepsis-3) recommends using the SOFA score (primarily validated
in patients in intensive care), with a score ≥2 in a patient with a suspected infection being suggestive of
sepsis.[34]
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Evaluation of shock Emergencies
Sequential (or Sepsis-related) Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) criteria
Created by BMJ, adapted from Vincent JL, Moreno R, Takala J, et al. The SOFA (Sepsis-related Organ
Failure Assessment) score to describe organ dysfunction/failure. On behalf of the Working Group on Sepsis-
Related Problems of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care Med. 1996;22:707-710.
SOFA criteria
Although the presence of a positive qSOFA should alert the clinician to the possibility of sepsis in all resource
settings, its poor sensitivity has led the Surviving Sepsis Campaign to advise against using the qSOFA,
compared with NEWS or MEWS, as a single screening tool for sepsis or septic shock.[36]
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) UK guideline on sepsis emphasizes the need
to "think sepsis" in any patient presenting with possible infection. It recommends structured vital signs
monitoring and stratification of risk of severe illness and death according to patient age and setting.[35]
Treatment guidelines have been produced by the Surviving Sepsis campaign and remain the most widely
accepted treatment standards.[36] [40]
Recommended treatment of patients with suspected sepsis is:
• Measure lactate level, and remeasure if initial lactate is elevated (>18 mg/dL [>2 mmol/L]).
• Obtain blood cultures before administering antibiotics.
• Administer broad-spectrum antibiotics (with methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  [MRSA]
coverage if there is high risk of MRSA) for adults with possible septic shock or a high likelihood for
sepsis.
• For adults with sepsis or septic shock at high risk of fungal infection, empiric antifungal therapy should
be administered.
• Begin rapid administration of crystalloid fluids for hypotension or lactate level ≥36 mg/dL (≥4 mmol/L).
Consult local protocols.
• Administer vasopressors peripherally if hypotensive during, or after, fluid resuscitation to maintain MAP
≥65 mmHg, rather than delaying initiation until central venous access is secured. Norepinephrine is the
vasopressor of choice.
• For adults with sepsis-induced hypoxemic respiratory failure, high-flow nasal oxygen should be given.
Ideally, these interventions should all begin within the first hour following sepsis recognition.[40]
For adults with possible sepsis without shock, where concern for infection persists, antibiotics should be
given as soon as possible (within 3 hours) from the time when sepsis was first recognized.[36]
For adults with a low likelihood of infection and without shock, antibiotics can be deferred while continuing to
closely monitor the patient.[36]
Patients with severe septic shock may develop corticosteroid insufficiency, diagnosed by adrenocorticotropic
hormone stimulation test, or simply based on high vasopressor requirement. Current guidelines recommend
that low-dose corticosteroids are given only to adults with septic shock and ongoing requirement for
vasopressor therapy (defined as a dose of epinephrine or norepinephrine [adrenaline or noradrenaline] ≥0.25
mcg/kg/min for at least 4 hours after initiation to maintain the target MAP).[36]
ECMO may be considered in carefully selected patients with refractory septic shock.[41] [42] [43]
For more information on sepsis, please see Sepsis in adults  and Sepsis in children .
EMERGENCIES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Evaluation of shock Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
Neurogenic shock
Patients with suspected neurogenic shock require immediate imaging and possible intervention to reverse
potentially reversible deficits, as well as fluid resuscitation to maintain vascular volume and cardiac output.
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
Approach
All patients who are clinically in a state of shock should be managed in a resuscitation, high-dependency, or
intensive care setting.
Transfer out of the resuscitation room should only be considered when the patient's vital signs are stabilized.
In any evaluation of shock, hemodynamic measurements have to be interpreted in the clinical context of
some basic principles. The following questions are useful:
• Is the patient in shock? (Is oxygen delivery or cellular metabolic demand not being met?)
• Does the patient respond to fluids? (Do they have a decreased preload?)
• If the patient is fluid responsive, is the arterial tone (afterload) increased or decreased?
• Is pump function (cardiac contractility) increased or decreased?
The answer to these questions will help to determine the type of shock.
Parameters to differentiate between types of shock and examples
Adapted with permission from "Rady MY. Bench-to-bedside review:
Resuscitation in the emergency department. Crit Care. 2005;9:170-176".
Indicators of regional perfusion, such as arterial or venous serum lactate and base deficit, are important
because early hemodynamic assessment based on vital signs and central venous pressure (CVP) does not
detect early or persistent global hypoxia.[44]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Parameters to evaluate shock
Clinical criteria, including vital signs, level of consciousness and assessments of peripheral perfusion (core-
periphery temperature gradient, capillary return time) are mandatory.
Hemodynamic monitoring
• Mean arterial pressure (MAP), systolic BP, and diastolic BP can be done continuously with an arterial
line and confirmed with hourly noninvasive BP monitoring.
• MAP may be estimated by adding the diastolic pressure to one third of the difference between the
systolic and diastolic pressures.
Ultrasonography[45]
• Decreased inferior vena cava filling and diameter are suggestive of hypovolemic shock.
• Point of care abdominal-thoracic ultrasound (e.g, FAST [focused assessment with sonography for
trauma]) may reveal pneumothorax (that may be complicated by tension pneumothorax), or free fluid in
the abdominal cavity.[46]
• Echocardiography to determine ventricular volumes and cardiac output is helpful in assessing
cardiogenic shock.[47] Cardiac sonography may reveal valvular disorders, or pericardial effusion that
may be associated with cardiac tamponade.
Shock Index[48]
• Defined by the ratio of heart rate to systolic BP.
• A ratio of <1 is associated with decreased response to volume loading, but if >1, it usually indicates a
variable response to fluid administration.[49]
• Use of the shock index is mostly confined to hypovolemic shock. It may be unreliable in septic and
cardiogenic shock (when heart rate may increase in response to other factors), and in the setting of
older age, hypertension, or beta-blocker or calcium-channel blocker therapy.[48] [50]
Monitoring organ system effects
• Urine output of <0.5 mL/kg/hour, and change in mental status and tachypnea, indicate decreased
organ perfusion.
• Urine output is usually recorded each hour.
Serum markers of tissue metabolism
• A normal serum lactate level in a stressed patient is considered to be below 18 mg/dL (2 mmol/L).
• Lactate levels >36 mg/dL (>4 mmol/L) have been associated with greater mortality in shock. Early
lactate clearance is associated with better prognosis.[51]
• Lactate can be measured from an arterial or venous gas sample 2 or 3 times a day, or more often if
required, to monitor response to treatment.
• Base deficit, negative base excess, also correlates with outcome in shock. Initial base deficit does not
correlate well with initial blood lactate because there are numerous causes of an elevated lactate (e.g.,
metformin, beta-2 agonists) other than hypoperfusion. The base excess is defined as the amount of
hydrogen ions that would be required to return the pH of the blood to 7.35 if the PaCO₂ levels were
adjusted to normal.[52]
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
Scoring systems
Several risk stratification approaches have been proposed. All rely on a structured clinical assessment and
recording of the patient’s vital signs.[35] [37] [38][40] It is important to check local guidance for information on
which approach your institution recommends. The timeline of ensuing investigations and treatment should be
guided by this early assessment.[40]
Sepsis screening tools are designed to promote the early identification of sepsis, and consist of manual
methods or the automated use of the electronic health record (EHR). These include the Sequential (or
Sepsis-related) Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score, the quick SOFA (qSOFA) criteria, National Early
Warning Score (NEWS), and Modified Early Warning Score (MEWS). The accuracy of each tool varies, but
they are an important component of identifying sepsis early for timely intervention.[36]
Of these scoring systems, the SOFA scoring system has been subject to greatest study and has been
adopted for use in emergency and critical care management of potential shock victims, including screening
for shock and ongoing assessment.[53] [54] [55] A SOFA score of 7 or more on initial evaluation has been
associated with significant shock, with a score of 13 or greater associated with significant risk for mortality in
the intensive care setting.
Sequential (or Sepsis-related) Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) criteria
Created by BMJ, adapted from Vincent JL, Moreno R, Takala J, et al. The SOFA (Sepsis-related Organ
Failure Assessment) score to describe organ dysfunction/failure. On behalf of the Working Group on Sepsis-
Related Problems of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care Med. 1996;22:707-710.
SOFA criteria
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
The Third International Consensus Group (Sepsis-3) recommends using the SOFA score (primarily validated
in patients in intensive care) to assess for sepsis, with a score ≥2 in a patient with a suspected infection
being suggestive of sepsis.[34]
For patients with suspected sepsis outside the intensive care setting, a modified SOFA score, qSOFA, has
been found to have better predictability of in-hospital mortality.[56] However, there is evidence that qSOFA
may have poor sensitivity compared with other bedside early warning scores.[57] Therefore, the Surviving
Sepsis Campaign advises against using qSOFA, compared with NEWS or MEWS, as a single screening tool
for sepsis or septic shock.[36]
Early recognition of sepsis is essential because early treatment improves outcomes.[35]
See urgent considerations section for more details on immediate management.
Measuring the preload
Preload is measured by dynamic response of the CVP to a fluid challenge (e.g., 250 to 500 mL of balanced
crystalloid solution). Mini-fluid challenges (e.g., 100 mL) may be used to predict the effects of larger fluid
challenges in critically ill patients.[58]
Echocardiography or pulse-induced continuous cardio-output monitoring are also used to determine cardiac
output. In selected situations, pulmonary artery catheters may be helpful in initial and ongoing monitoring of
preload.
Measuring preload responsiveness
Measures of preload responsiveness can guide fluid administration. Methods include stroke volume variation,
systolic pressure variation, pulse pressure variation, plethysmographic variation, and passive leg raising.[59]
[60][61] [62][63][64]
Typically an increase in cardiac output of 10% to 12% after a fluid bolus of 300 to 500 mL of crystalloids is
considered to be a positive response.
Evaluation of hemodynamic status is difficult in some situations, including in mechanically ventilated patients.
Inappropriate fluid administration can be harmful, and measures of preload (e.g., CVP) are unhelpful
because, as end-diastolic pressure exceeds a given value, giving further fluids does not increase stroke
volume (Starling principle).[60]
Measuring contractility and afterload
Cardiac output is the output of the left ventricle/right ventricle per minute. There are various methods of
calculating cardiac output, but an ideal standard has not been established.
The most commonly used method is bedside echocardiography.[47] Alternative noninvasive methods
include Doppler ultrasound and measurements of pulse pressure, although the latter is a function of both
cardiac output and arterial function. As cardiac output is affected by the phase of respiration, it needs to be
measured at the same point in the respiratory cycle each time to enable comparison. 
Other methods include dilution and thermodilution using a pulmonary artery catheter. These use the Fick
principle, and the rate at which an indicator substance is diluted or temperature falls is proportional to the
cardiac output.
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
The ratio of the cardiac output (stroke volume x heart rate) to the body surface area in meters squared is the
cardiac index. Normal values of the cardiac index range from 2.2 to 2.5 L/minute/m². In cardiogenic shock the
cardiac index is typically <1.8 without inotropes and <2.0 to 2.2 with inotropes.[65]
Systemic vascular resistance: a measure of afterload derived from the cardiac output, MAP, and CVP.
Measures of tissue perfusion
Oxygen delivery (DO₂): the amount of oxygen delivered to the tissue is calculated as the product of cardiac
output, oxygen saturation, and hemoglobin level in the blood. A DO₂ of >600 ml/min/m² has been associated
with better outcomes.[66]
• DO₂ = cardiac output x oxygen saturation x hemoglobin level g/L (1.36) x 100.
Mixed venous oxygen saturations: the saturation of oxygen in the pulmonary artery, and the standard for
defining global adequacy of tissue perfusion.[67] [68] Normal venous saturations are between 65% and
75%. Superior vena cava oxygen saturation is usually higher by about 8% compared with inferior vena
cava oxygen saturation, but they parallel each other in shock.[69] [70] A sustained elevation of >80% in the
presence of low oxygen delivery carries a poor prognosis, as it indicates tissue inability to utilize oxygen,
and is usually seen after cardiac arrest resuscitation.[71] During initial stabilization, even after attaining
global indices such as BP and urine output, tissue hypoxia can still persist. If uncorrected, it can lead to
oxygen debt.[44] Oxygen debt is due to an imbalance between supply and demand, which is associated with
increased organ dysfunction.[72] Early correction of venous saturations to >70% is associated with better
outcomes.[15] Venous saturations of <70% are an independent predictor of mortality.[73]
Lactate: levels >36 mg/dL (>4 mmol/L) are associated with greater mortality in shock. Base excess levels are
used during bedside resuscitation in determining fluid volume replacement for acute trauma victims.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials overview
Common
Myocardial infarction
Heart failure
Beta-blocker and other drug-related toxicity
Hemorrhage, external or internal from any site
Trauma with external or internal hemorrhage
Gastrointestinal fluid losses
Intestinal obstruction with fluid third spacing
Pancreatitis with fluid third spacing or hemorrhage
Burns
Excessive renal loss
Pulmonary embolism
Septic shock
Anaphylaxis
Poisoning and adverse drug reaction
Uncommon
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiac valve disease
Heat stroke/insensible fluid losses
Tension pneumothorax
Cardiac tamponade
Neurogenic shock
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
Uncommon
Adrenal crisis
Thiamine deficiency
Arteriovenous fistulae
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials
Common
Myocardial infarction
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
central chest pain,
radiation to left arm,
history of exertional
chest pain; smoking,
hypercholesterolemia;
family history; diabetes
mellitus; high BP
signs of heart failure;
jugular venous
distention, basal
crackles on lung
auscultation; heart
murmur
»serum troponin:
elevated
High sensitivity troponin
assays are preferred.
They allow for early
detection of cardiac
injury at 1 hour.
Standard assays are
elevated maximally at
10 to 12 hours.[74]  
»serum creatine
kinase (CK-MB
isoenzyme fraction):
elevated
»ECG: may show ST-
segment elevation or
depression
»coronary
angiography: may
show presence
of thrombus with
occlusion of the artery
Diagnostic modality of
choice to confirm acute
myocardial infarction in
patients with STEMI.
»echocardiography:
regional wall
abnormalities and
valvular abnormalities
◊ Heart failure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
shortness of breath,
ankle swelling,
orthopnea, paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea,
history of cardiac
risk factors, previous
myocardial infarction,
valvular heart disease
jugular venous
distension, orthopnea,
lower extremity
swelling, crackles in the
chest on auscultation,
increased respiratory
rate, S3 gallop rhythm
on cardiac auscultation
»echocardiography:
depressed ejection
fraction, decreased
systolic left ventricular
function
Only the systolic
function is preserved;
diastolic indices are
altered.
»B-type natriuretic
peptide (BNP) or
N-terminal pro-
BNP (NT-proBNP):
elevated
In acute settings,
natriuretic peptide
biomarker levels may
be more useful for
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
Common
◊ Heart failure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
ruling out than ruling
in a diagnosis of heart
failure. Several other
cardiac and non-
cardiac conditions may
also be associated with
elevated BNP or NT-
proBNP levels.[75]
»chest x-ray:
pulmonary edema,
Kerley A, B, and C
lines, cardiomegaly
Sometimes difficult to
differentiate from acute
respiratory distress
syndrome.
◊ Beta-blocker and other drug-related toxicity
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
prior hypertension or
heart disease being
medically treated
with a beta-blocker,
a calcium-channel
blocker, or a class 1c
antiarrhythmic such
as flecainide; syncope
and lightheadedness;
weakness; loss of
appetite
weak pulse, pulmonary
rales, slow heart
rate (beta-blockers),
peripheral edema,
signs of poor skin
perfusion
»ECG: bradycardia,
increased PR interval
»urine drug screen:
presence of drug in
urine
»serum levels for
suspected drugs:
drug level
◊ Hemorrhage, external or internal from any site
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
external injury such
as laceration; vomiting
blood or bloody stools;
melena; vaginal blood
loss; or pelvic pain in a
woman of childbearing
age
tachycardia;
lightheadedness; pale
fingernail beds and
signs of poor skin
perfusion; weak pulse;
decreased urine output
»hemoglobin/
hematocrit: low blood
count
»stool guaiac test
for blood: presence of
blood in stool
»serum lactate: >18
mg/dL (>2 mmol/L)
abnormal; >36 mg/dL
(>4 mmol/L) associated
with higher mortality
»base deficit: <-2
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Hemorrhage, external or internal from any site
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
»examination of
vomitus for blood:
presence of blood in
vomit
A base deficit of
-2 mEq/L or less is
considered abnormal,
-10 mEq/L or less is
associated with severe
metabolic acidosis.[20]
◊ Trauma with external or internal hemorrhage
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
injury either blunt or
penetrating; fall or
crush injury
tachycardia;
lightheadedness; pale
fingernail beds and
signs of poor skin
perfusion; weak pulse;
decreased urine output
»FAST (focused
assessment with
sonography for
trauma): may reveal
free fluid in abdominal
cavity, or pneumothorax
»chest x-ray:
hemothorax
»hemoglobin/
hematocrit: low blood
count
»CT scan thorax:
evidence of
hemorrhage
»serum lactate: >18
mg/dL (>2 mmol/L)
abnormal; >36 mg/dL
(>4 mmol/L) associated
with higher mortality
»base deficit: <-2
A base deficit of
-2 mEq/L or less is
considered abnormal,
-10 mEq/L or less is
associated with severe
metabolic acidosis.[20]
◊ Gastrointestinal fluid losses
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
vomiting, diarrhea,
prolonged symptoms,
more common in
children
dry skin and mucosa,
loss of skin turgor,
decreased urine output
»CBC: elevated WBC
count if infectious
cause of diarrhea and
vomiting
»serum chemistries:
increased BUN/
creatinine
»trial of fluids (oral
or intravenous):
clinical improvement
with fluid resuscitation
»stool evaluation for
culture, organisms,
or antibodies:
positive if infectious
cause
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
Common
◊ Intestinal obstruction with fluid third spacing
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
abdominal pain and
distention, nausea,
vomiting, absolute
constipation, previous
history of abdominal
surgery, lack of passing
flatus
hyperdynamic or
absent bowel sounds,
hernia, distended
tympanic abdomen
»abdominal x-ray:
dilated loops of bowel
with multiple fluid levels
»CT abdomen:
dilated loops of bowel,
transition point at
level of obstruction
from collapsed to
dilated bowel, cause
for obstruction, such as
mass, may be evident
◊ Pancreatitis with fluid third spacing or hemorrhage
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
epigastric abdominal
pain; radiation to
the back; history of
gallstones, alcohol
abuse, use of steroids;
hyperlipidemia;
previous episodes
epigastric tenderness
with guarding and
rebound; ecchymosis
around umbilicus
(Cullen sign),
ecchymosis in flanks
(Grey-Turner sign)
»serum lipase or
amylase: >3 times
the upper limit of the
normal range
Use serum lipase
testing (if available)
in preference to
serum amylase.[76]
[77] Serum lipase
and amylase have
similar sensitivity
and specificity but
lipase levels remain
elevated for longer
(up to 14 days after
symptom onset vs.
5 days for amylase),
providing a higher
likelihood of picking
up the diagnosis in
patients with a delayed
presentation.[78]
»LFTs: usually elevated
if gallstones are the
cause
»CT scan: may
show pancreatic
inflammation, peri-
pancreatic stranding,
calcifications, or fluid
collections; confirms or
excludes gallstones
Abdominal imaging
is not needed for
diagnosis in most
patients. Necrosis
generally takes around
5 days to develop,
so an early CT scan
cannot be used to
assess disease
severity.
American College
of Gastroenterology
guidelines recommend
CT or MRI after 48
hours in patients who
do not improve or
whose symptoms
worsen.[76] Other
guidelines recommend
a delay of 72-96
hours after symptom
onset before contrast-
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Pancreatitis with fluid third spacing or hemorrhage
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
enhanced CT or MRI to
assess for necrosis.[79]
»ultrasound
abdomen: fluid
around the pancreas;
may show biliary
duct dilation or acute
cholelithiasis
Abdominal imaging
is not needed for
diagnosis in most
patients. However, once
a diagnosis of acute
pancreatitis has been
made, transabdominal
ultrasound is required
to rule out gallstones as
the etiology.[76]
Burns
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
children and older
people are at risk
erythema, cellulitis,
clouded cornea;
burns: dry and painful
(first degree), wet
and painful (second
degree), dry and
insensitive (third
degree), affecting
subcutaneous tissue,
tendon, or bone (fourth
degree)
»CBC: low hematocrit,
hypovolemia,
neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia
Indicated in patients
with significant burns.
Neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia may
be indicators of sepsis.
»metabolic panel:
high levels of BUN,
creatinine, glucose;
hyponatremia,
hypokalemia
Indicated in patients
with significant burns.
»carboxyhemoglobin:
high levels
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
Common
Burns
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Indicated if inhalation
injury is suspected.
»arterial blood gas:
may show hypoxia
Indicated if inhalation
injury or carbon
monoxide/cyanide
poisoning is suspected.
»fluorescein
staining: damaged
corneal epithelial cells
»CT scan of head
and spine: brain
injury, fracture
May be indicated based
on injury mechanism
and history.
»wound histology
and biopsy culture:
infection
Indicated if sepsis is
suspected.
◊ Excessive renal loss
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
use of diuretic
medications; poorly
controlled diabetes
mellitus with polyuria
weakness,
lightheadedness,
tachycardia, dry
mucous membranes,
signs of poor skin
perfusion
»urine osmolality:
unconcentrated
»urine electrolytes:
sodium loss
Pulmonary embolism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
chest pain; shortness of
breath; recent surgery
or immobilization;
active malignancy;
recent long flight;
possible cyanosis,
respiratory distress
with use of accessory
muscles, lung
auscultation
»CT pulmonary
angiogram (CTPA)
or multidetector
CT scan: clots in the
pulmonary arteries
»D-dimer: elevated
»duplex of leg veins:
positive for deep vein
thrombosis
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
Pulmonary embolism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
known deep vein
thrombosis; known
prothrombotic
tendency; use of oral
birth control pill
normal; jugular
venous distention
if large embolism;
calf tenderness,
tachycardia, low oxygen
saturations
CTPA is the preferred
investigation for
definitive confirmation
of pulmonary
embolism.
»ventilation/
perfusion lung scan:
may show an area of
ventilated lung that is
not being perfused
Septic shock
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
symptoms of localized
infection, nonspecific
symptoms include
fever or shivering,
dizziness, nausea and
vomiting, muscle pain,
feeling confused or
disoriented; may be
history of risk factors
include, for example,
recent surgery or
invasive procedures,
immunosuppression,
pregnancy or
postpartum period,
frailty, intravenous drug
use, or breach of skin
integrity
tachycardia,
tachypnoea,
hypotension, fever
>100.4˚F (38˚C) or
hypothermia <96.8˚F
(36˚C), prolonged
capillary refill, mottled
or ashen skin,
cyanosis, low oxygen
saturation, newly
altered mental state,
reduced urine output
»blood culture: may
be positive for organism
Blood cultures should
be taken immediately,
and preferably
before antibiotics
are started, provided
their sampling will not
delay administration
of antibiotics. Other
cultures (e.g., sputum,
stool, and urine) should
be taken as clinically
indicated.
»serum lactate: may
be elevated; levels
>18 mg/dL (>2 mmol/
L) associated with
adverse prognosis;
even worse prognosis
with levels >36 mg/dL
(>4 mmol/L)
Elevated serum
lactate indicates tissue
hypoperfusion, and is
most reliably assessed
»ECG: may show
evidence of ischemia,
atrial fibrillation, or
other arrhythmia; may
be normal
An ECG should
be arranged to
help exclude other
differential diagnoses,
including myocardial
infarction, pericarditis,
and myocarditis. Sepsis
also predisposes to
myocardial dysfunction
and arrhythmias.
»CXR: may show
consolidation;
demonstrates position
of central venous
catheter and tracheal
tube
»urine microscopy
and culture: may
be positive for nitrites,
protein or blood;
elevated leukocyte
count; positive culture
for organism
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
Common
Septic shock
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
using an arterial
sample.
»CBC with
differential: WBC
count >12 × 10⁹/L
(12,000/microlitre)
(leukocytosis); WBC
count <4 × 10⁹/L (4000/
microlitre) (leukopenia);
or a normal WBC count
with >10% immature
forms; low platelets
WBC count is sensitive
but not specific for the
diagnosis of sepsis.
»CRP: elevated
»blood urea and
serum electrolytes:
serum electrolytes may
be deranged; blood
urea may be elevated
»serum creatinine:
may be elevated
Elevated creatinine
may occur in sepsis
associated with renal
dysfunction.
»liver function tests:
may show elevated
bilirubin, alanine
aminotransferase,
aspartate
aminotransferase,
alkaline phosphatase,
and gamma glutamyl
transpeptidase
Sepsis can originate
from hepatic or peri-
hepatic infections.
Comorbid hepatic
disease can affect drug
metabolism.
»sputum culture:
may be positive for
organism
»lumbar puncture:
may be elevated
WBC count, presence
of organism on
microscopy and
positive culture
Performed if meningitis
suspected.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
Septic shock
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
»coagulation
studies: may be
abnormal
»ABG: may be
hypoxia, hypercapnia,
elevated anion gap,
metabolic acidosis
Anaphylaxis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
known allergy; new
drug or food ingestion;
immunization; recalls
bite or sting; rapid
development of
symptoms; shortness
of breath; facial
swelling; hypotension,
tachycardia, and
agitation
facial edema, tongue
swelling, respiratory
distress, wheezing ,
rash, weals, erythema
»trial of
intramuscular
epinephrine:
Improvement in
symptoms
»serum tryptase
level: may be elevated
The UK National
Institute for Health
and Care Excellence
recommends that
serum samples
should be taken from
children <16 years
during or soon after
resuscitation.[80]
In clinically obvious
food-induced
anaphylaxis, tryptase
levels are seldom
elevated, even if serum
was collected in a
timely manner.[81]
The American
Academy of Allergy,
Asthma & Immunology
recommends
obtaining a baseline
serum tryptase in
patients presenting
with a history of
recurrent, idiopathic,
or severe anaphylaxis,
particularly those
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
Common
Anaphylaxis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
presenting with
hypotension.[33]
◊ Poisoning and adverse drug reaction
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
ingestion of potential
poison often with
vomiting or diarrhea;
medication that is
associated with shock
as a potential adverse
reaction; potential
drug interactions
(such as nitrates for
cardiac disease and
drugs used for erectile
dysfunction)
tachycardia;
lightheadedness; pale
fingernail beds and
signs of poor skin
perfusion; weak pulse;
decreased urine output
»urine and serum
drug screen: drug in
urine and serum
»acetaminophen
serum levels:
acetaminophen in
serum
»salicylate serum
levels: salicylate in
serum
»x-ray abdomen: pills
visualized
»serum osmolar
gap: evidence of
alcohols
Uncommon
◊ Cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
shortness of breath
on exertion; history
of heart failure; viral
infections; alcohol
abuse; family history
evidence of heart
failure; jugular
venous distention,
hepatomegaly, pedal
edema, rales in lung
bases; accessory
muscle use; diminished
peripheral pulses
»echocardiography:
reduced ejection
fraction, increased
left ventricular muscle
mass
»B-type natriuretic
peptide: >100
nanograms/L may
indicate heart failure
◊ Cardiac valve disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
rheumatic fever,
spiking fevers, or new
murmur suggestive of
endocarditis, recent
myocardial infarction,
bicuspid aortic valve,
mitral facies,
heart murmur on
auscultation, rales at
lung bases, spiking
temperatures if
endocarditis
»Doppler
echocardiography:
demonstrates stenosis
or regurgitation of
valve, mobility of valve
leaflets, and large
vegetations if present
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Cardiac valve disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
shortness of breath on
exertion, syncope
If endocarditis
suspected but
transthoracic
echo-negative,
transesophageal study
is indicated.
»CBC: elevated WBC
count with endocarditis
»blood cultures:
positive for growth if
endocarditic cause for
valvular destruction
Three sets of cultures
suggested.
◊ Heat stroke/insensible fluid losses
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
prolonged exposure to
warm temperatures,
prolonged exertion in
hot climates, burns
dry skin and mucosa,
loss of skin turgor,
may be lethargic and
confused, burns
»trial of fluids (oral
or intravenous):
clinical improvement
with rehydration
»serum chemistries:
increased BUN/
creatinine ratio
Tension pneumothorax
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
sudden onset, often
pleuritic, chest pain;
shortness of breath;
rapid deterioration;
recent placement
of a central venous
pressure line; history
of emphysema; chest
trauma
absent unilateral breath
sounds on the affected
side; trachea deviated
to the opposite side;
hyper-resonance to
percussion on affected
side
»diagnostic and
therapeutic needle
thoracostomy: hiss of
air as catheter/needle
enters the pleural
space
Formal chest drain
needed.
»bedside
ultrasound:
pneumothorax
visualized
»chest x-ray after
decompression:
chest drain correctly
placed; lung inflated
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
Uncommon
Cardiac tamponade
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
recent cardiac
surgery or angiogram/
angioplasty; chest
trauma; malignancy;
pericarditis; increasing
shortness of breath on
minimal exertion
muffled hearts sounds,
low BP; jugular venous
distention (Beck triad);
pulsus paradoxus
»echocardiography:
pericardial fluid causing
restriction of cardiac
filling
»ECG: electrical
alternans
◊ Neurogenic shock
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
brain or spinal cord
injury, epidural or spinal
procedures
hypotension,
bradycardia, and
hypothermia; warm
dry peripheries with
bounding pulses;
priapism; flaccid
paralysis of limbs
»MRI of the
spine: damage or
compression of spinal
cord
◊ Adrenal crisis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
can occur in context of
other illness especially
sepsis, trauma, and
surgery, use of steroids
either oral, inhaled, or
topical over large areas;
anticoagulant therapy;
nausea and vomiting
lack of signs to indicate
an alternative cause
»serum chemistry:
may be hyponatremic
and hyperkalemic
»cortisol: <20
micrograms/dL
»short synacthen
test: cortisol levels do
not rise
Patient is given
250 micrograms of
adrenocorticotropic
hormone intravenously.
Blood samples are
taken at 30 minutes
and 60 minutes.
◊ Thiamine deficiency
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
alcoholism, long-term
nutritional deficiencies
warm bounding pulses,
sometimes associated
with skin changes, e.g.,
liver spots and brown
patches
»thiamine level: very
low according to local
lab parameters
Especially seen in
alcoholism. Thiamine
»CBC: macrocytosis,
anemia
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Evaluation of shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Thiamine deficiency
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
should be replaced
before giving glucose.
◊ Arteriovenous fistulae
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
depends on site
of fistula, trauma
especially gunshot
wounds, recent
instrumentation; e.g.,
central line, renal
access procedure
signs of high-output
heart failure, bounding
pulses, low diastolic BP,
high pulse pressure
»Doppler
ultrasound:
demonstration of flow
from artery to vein
»echocardiography:
bubbles appear on the
left side of the heart
after 3-5 cardiac cycles
»CT angiography:
anatomic
demonstration of the
fistula
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Evaluation of shock Evidence tables
Evidence tables
What are the effects of early versus late initiation of empiric antimicrobial
treatment in adults with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis?[35]
This table is a summary of the analysis reported in a guideline (underpinned by a systematic review)
that focuses on the above important clinical question.
View the full source guideline (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51/evidence)
Evidence C *
Confidence in the evidence is very low or low where GRADE has been performed
and the intervention may be more effective/beneficial than the comparison for key
outcomes. However, this is uncertain and new evidence could change this in the
future.
Population: Adults with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis
Intervention: Early initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Comparison: Late initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
<1 hour versus >1 hour
Mortality ᵃ Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality - Intensive Care Unit
(ICU) setting
Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality - Emergency
Department (ED) setting
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<2 hours versus >2 hours
Mortality ᵃ No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Mortality - ICU setting Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality - ED setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<3 hours versus >3 hours
Mortality ᵃ Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality - ICU setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
EVIDENCE TABLES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Evaluation of shock Evidence tables
EVIDENCE TABLES
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
Mortality - ED setting Favors intervention Very Low
<4 hours versus >4 hours
Mortality - ED setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<5 hours versus >5 hours
Mortality - ED setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<6 hours versus >6 hours
Mortality ᵃ Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality - ICU setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Mortality - ED setting Favors intervention Very Low
Recommendations as stated in the source guideline
The guideline committee recommends that adults, children, and young people over the age of 12 who have
suspected sepsis and one or more high-risk criteria, should be given a broad-spectrum antimicrobial at the
maximum recommended dose without delay (within 1 hour of establishing they meet high-risk criteria in an
acute hospital s e t t i n g ) . ᵇ  See guideline for details on criteria for different levels of risk.
Note
Results in this table are based on observational studies only.
ᵃ  Includes overall mortality in intensive care and emergency department settings.
ᵇ  This guideline recommends that all people with suspected sepsis have a face-to-face assessment and a
risk stratification tool is used to determine risk of severe illness and death from sepsis. Recommendations
depend on the presence and number of high-, moderate-to-high, and low-risk criteria.
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Evaluation of shock Evidence tables
What are the effects of early versus late initiation of empiric antimicrobial
treatment in children with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis?[35]
This table is a summary of the analysis reported in a guideline (underpinned by a systematic review)
that focuses on the above important clinical question.
View the full source guideline (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51/evidence)
Evidence C *
Confidence in the evidence is very low or low where GRADE has been performed
and the intervention may be more effective/beneficial than the comparison for key
outcomes. However, this is uncertain and new evidence could change this in the
future.
Population: Children with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis
Intervention: Early initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Comparison: Late initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
<1 hour versus >1 hour ᵃ 
 Pediatric Intensive Care Unit
(PICU) mortality
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<2 hours versus >2 hours ᵃ 
 PICU mortality No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<3 hours versus >3 hours ᵃ 
 PICU mortality Favors intervention Very Low
<4 hours versus >4 hours ᵃ 
 PICU mortality Favors intervention Very Low
Recommendations as stated in the source guideline
The National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guideline on Sepsis: recognition, diagnosis and
early management makes the following recommendation:
For children aged 5–11 years who have suspected sepsis and 1 or more high-risk criteria, give a broad-
spectrum antimicrobial ᵇ  at the maximum recommended dose without delay (within 1 hour of identifying that
they meet any high-risk criteria in an acute hospital setting).
Note
The guideline group noted that the direct evidence in children came from one small (n=130), single-
centre retrospective study of children in PICU with severe sepsis and septic shock. Therefore, they also
EVIDENCE TABLES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Evaluation of shock Evidence tables
EVIDENCE TABLES
extrapolated from the indirect evidence in adults to make the same recommendation for all age groups
(including children aged under 5 years and 5-11 years).
ᵇ  Time from sepsis recognition to initial treatment and first appropriate treatment.
ᵇ  See full guideline for more information.
* Evidence levels
The Evidence level is an internal rating applied by BMJ Best Practice. See the EBM Toolkit (https://
bestpractice.bmj.com/info/evidence-tables/) for details.
Confidence in evidence
A -  High or moderate to high
B -  Moderate or low to moderate
C -  Very low or low
† Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
Based on statistical significance, which demonstrates that the results are unlikely to be due to chance, but
which does not necessarily translate to a clinical significance.
‡ Grade certainty ratings
High The authors are very confident that the true
effect is similar to the estimated effect.
Moderate The authors are moderately confident that
the true effect is likely to be close to the
estimated effect.
Low The authors have limited confidence in the
effect estimate and the true effect may be
substantially different.
Very Low The authors have very little confidence in
the effect estimate and the true effect is
likely to be substantially different.
BMJ Best Practice EBM Toolkit: What is GRADE? (https://bestpractice.bmj.com/info/toolkit/learn-ebm/what-
is-grade/)
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Evaluation of shock References
Key articles
• van Diepen S, Katz JN, Albert NM, et al. Contemporary management of cardiogenic shock: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017 Oct 17;136(16):e232-68.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525)   Abstract
• Shaker MS, Wallace DV, Golden DBK, et al. Anaphylaxis-a 2020 practice parameter update,
systematic review, and Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
(GRADE) analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020 Apr;145(4):1082-123.  Full text (https://
www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(20)30105-6/fulltext)   Abstract
• Campbell RL, Li JT, Nicklas RA, et al. Emergency department diagnosis and treatment of anaphylaxis:
a practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2014 Dec;113(6):599-608.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2014.10.007)   Abstract
• Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International
guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock 2021. Crit Care Med. 2021 Nov
1;49(11):e1063-143.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2021/11000/
Surviving_Sepsis_Campaign__International.21.aspx)   Abstract
• Seymour CW, Liu VX, Iwashyna TJ, et al. Assessment of clinical criteria for sepsis: for the Third
International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA. 2016 Feb
23;315(8):762-74. Abstract
References
1. Weil MH, Shubin H. Proposed reclassification of shock states with special reference to distributive
defects. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1971 Oct;23(0):13-23. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/5164840?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. De Backer D, Creteur J, Preiser JC, et al. Microvascular blood flow is altered in patients with sepsis.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Jul 1;166(1):98-104. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12091178?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Vincent JL, De Backer D. Microvascular dysfunction as a cause of organ dysfunction in severe
sepsis. Crit Care. 2005;9 Suppl 4:S9-12. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16168075?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. De Backer D, Creteur J, Dubois MJ, et al. The effects of dobutamine on microcirculatory alterations
in patients with septic shock are independent of its systemic effects. Crit Care Med. 2006
Feb;34(2):403-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16424721?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Gitz Holler J, Jensen HK, Henriksen DP, et al. Etiology of shock in the emergency department:
a 12-year population-based cohort study. Shock. 2019 Jan;51(1):60-7.  Full text (https://
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Evaluation of shock References
REFERENCES
www.doi.org/10.1097/SHK.0000000000000816)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27984523?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. Hochman JS, Boland J, Sleeper LA, et al. Current spectrum of cardiogenic shock and effect of early
revascularization on mortality. Results of an International Registry. SHOCK Registry Investigators.
Circulation. 1995 Feb 1;91(3):873-81.  Full text (https://circ.ahajournals.org/content/91/3/873.full)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7828316?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Bone RC. Toward an epidemiology and natural history of SIRS (systemic inflammatory response
syndrome). JAMA. 1992 Dec 23-30;268(24):3452-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/1460735?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Bloom JE, Andrew E, Dawson LP, et al. Incidence and outcomes of nontraumatic shock in adults using
emergency medical services in Victoria, Australia. JAMA Netw Open. 2022 Jan 4;5(1):e2145179. 
Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8792885)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35080603?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Thayer KL, Zweck E, Ayouty M, et al. Invasive hemodynamic assessment and classification
of in-hospital mortality risk among patients with cardiogenic shock. Circ Heart Fail. 2020
Sep;13(9):e007099.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10243474)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32900234?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Westaby S, Kharbanda R, Banning AP. Cardiogenic shock in ACS. Part 1: prediction, presentation
and medical therapy. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2011 Dec 20;9(3):158-71.  Full text (https://www.nature.com/
articles/nrcardio.2011.194)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22182955?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Hochman JS. Cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction: expanding the
paradigm. Circulation. 2003 Jun 24;107(24):2998-3002.  Full text (https://circ.ahajournals.org/
content/107/24/2998.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12821585?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Hochman JS, Buller CE, Sleeper LA, et al. Cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial
infarction - etiologies, management and outcome: a report from the SHOCK Trial Registry. SHould
we emergently revascularize Occluded Coronaries for cardiogenic shocK? J Am Coll Cardiol.
2000 Sep;36(3 Suppl A):1063-70. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10985706?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Vieillard-Baron A, Caille V, Charron C, et al. Actual incidence of global left ventricular hypokinesia
in adult septic shock. Crit Care Med. 2008 Jun;36(6):1701-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18496368?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al; SHOCK Investigators. Early revascularization in acute
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med. 1999 Aug 26;341(9):625-34. 
Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199908263410901#t=article)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10460813?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in the treatment of severe sepsis
and septic shock. N Engl J Med. 2001 Nov 8;345(19):1368-77.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Evaluation of shock References
full/10.1056/NEJMoa010307#t=article)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11794169?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Sebat F, Johnson D, Musthafa AA, et al. A multidisciplinary community hospital program for early and
rapid resuscitation of shock in nontrauma patients. Chest. 2005 May;127(5):1729-43. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15888853?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al. Balanced crystalloids versus saline in critically ill adults. N
Engl J Med. 2018 Mar 1;378(9):829-39.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1711584)
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29485925?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, Evans DJ, et al. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in
critically ill people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Aug 3;(8):CD000567.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD000567.pub7/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30073665?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Crombie N, Doughty HA, Bishop JRB, et al. Resuscitation with blood products in patients with
trauma-related haemorrhagic shock receiving prehospital care (RePHILL): a multicentre, open-
label, randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Haematol. 2022 Apr;9(4):e250-e261.  Full
text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8960285)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35271808?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Rossaint R, Afshari A, Bouillon B, et al. The European guideline on management of major
bleeding and coagulopathy following trauma: sixth edition. Crit Care. 2023 Mar 1;27(1):80.  Full
text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9977110)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36859355?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Latif RK, Clifford SP, Baker JA, et al. Traumatic hemorrhage and chain of survival. Scand J Trauma
Resusc Emerg Med. 2023 May 24;31(1):25.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC10207757)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37226264?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Ker K, Roberts I, Shakur H, et al. Antifibrinolytic drugs for acute traumatic injury. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2015 May 9;(5):CD004896.  Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/14651858.CD004896.pub4/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25956410?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. CRASH-2 collaborators, Roberts I, Shakur H, Afolabi A, et al. The importance of early treatment
with tranexamic acid in bleeding trauma patients: an exploratory analysis of the CRASH-2
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2011 Mar 26;377(9771):1096-101, 1101.e1-2. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21439633?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Gayet-Ageron A, Prieto-Merino D, Ker K, et al; Antifibrinolytic Trials Collaboration. Effect of treatment
delay on the effectiveness and safety of antifibrinolytics in acute severe haemorrhage: a meta-analysis
of individual patient-level data from 40 138 bleeding patients. Lancet. 2018 Jan 13;391(10116):125-32.
Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673617324558?via%3Dihub)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29126600?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. van Diepen S, Katz JN, Albert NM, et al. Contemporary management of cardiogenic shock: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017 Oct 17;136(16):e232-68.  Full
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Evaluation of shock References
REFERENCES
text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000525)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28923988?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Pilarczyk K, Werdan K, Russ M et al. The German-Austrian S3 guideline "cardiogenic shock due to
myocardial infarction: diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment". Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2020 Dec 24. 
Full text (https://www.thieme-connect.com/products/ejournals/html/10.1055/s-0040-1719155)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33368106?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Werdan K, Boeken U, Briegel MJ et al. Short version of the 2nd edition of the German-Austrian S3
guidelines "Cardiogenic shock complicating myocardial infarction-diagnosis, monitoring and treatment"
Anaesthesist. Jan 2021;70(1):42-70. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32997208?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. De Luca G, Dirksen MT, Spaulding C, et al. Drug-eluting vs bare-metal stents in primary angioplasty: a
pooled patient-level meta-analysis of randomized trials. Arch Intern Med. 2012 Apr 23;172(8):611-21;
discussion 621-2.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1001/archinternmed.2012.758)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22529227?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Bloom JE, Chan W, Kaye DM, et al. State of shock: contemporary vasopressor and inotrope
use in cardiogenic shock. J Am Heart Assoc. 2023 Aug;12(15):e029787.  Full text (https://
pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10492962)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37489740?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Khorsandi M, Dougherty S, Bouamra O, et al. Extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation for refractory
cardiogenic shock after adult cardiac surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Cardiothorac
Surg. 2017 Jul 17;12(1):55.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1186/s13019-017-0618-0)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28716039?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Shaker MS, Wallace DV, Golden DBK, et al. Anaphylaxis-a 2020 practice parameter update,
systematic review, and Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation
(GRADE) analysis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020 Apr;145(4):1082-123.  Full text (https://
www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(20)30105-6/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/32001253?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Campbell RL, Li JT, Nicklas RA, et al. Emergency department diagnosis and treatment of anaphylaxis:
a practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2014 Dec;113(6):599-608.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2014.10.007)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25466802?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Golden DBK, Wang J, Waserman S, et al. Anaphylaxis: a 2023 practice parameter update. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2024 Feb;132(2):124-76.  Full text (https://www.annallergy.org/article/
S1081-1206(23)01304-2/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38108678?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The Third International Consensus definitions
for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA. 2016 Feb 23;315(8):801-10.  Full text (https://
jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2492881)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/26903338?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Evaluation of shock References
35. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Sepsis: recognition, diagnosis and early
management. Mar 2024 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51)
36. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: International
guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock 2021. Crit Care Med. 2021 Nov
1;49(11):e1063-143.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2021/11000/
Surviving_Sepsis_Campaign__International.21.aspx)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34605781?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Royal College of Physicians. National Early Warning Score (NEWS) 2. December 2017 [internet
publication].  Full text (www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/outputs/national-early-warning-score-news-2)
38. American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) Expert Panel on Sepsis. DART: an evidence-
driven tool to guide the early recognition and treatment of sepsis and septic shock [internet
publication].  Full text (https://poctools.acep.org/POCTool/Sepsis(DART)/276ed0a9-f24d-45f1-8d0c-
e908a2758e5a)
39. Academy of Medical Royal Colleges. Statement on the initial antimicrobial treatment of sepsis.
May 2022 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.aomrc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/
Statement_on_the_initial_antimicrobial_treatment_of_sepsis_0522.pdf)
40. Surviving Sepsis Campaign. Hour-1 bundle: initial resuscitation for sepsis and septic shock. 2019
[internet publication].  Full text (https://sccm.org/getattachment/survivingsepsiscampaign/guidelines/
adult-patients/surviving-sepsis-campaign-hour-1-bundle.pdf)
41. Ling RR, Ramanathan K, Poon WH, et al. Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
as mechanical circulatory support in adult septic shock: a systematic review and meta-analysis
with individual participant data meta-regression analysis. Crit Care. 2021 Jul 14;25(1):246.  Full
text (https://www.doi.org/10.1186/s13054-021-03668-5)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34261492?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Weiss SL, Peters MJ, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign international guidelines for the
management of septic shock and sepsis-associated organ dysfunction in children. Intensive Care Med.
2020 Feb;46(suppl 1):10-67.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1007/s00134-019-05878-6)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32030529?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Ramanathan K, Yeo N, Alexander P, et al. Role of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in
children with sepsis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care. 2020 Dec 7;24(1):684.  Full
text (https://www.doi.org/10.1186/s13054-020-03418-z)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33287861?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Rady MY, Rivers EP, Nowak RM. Resuscitation of the critically ill in the ED: responses of
blood pressure, heart rate, shock index, central venous oxygen saturation, and lactate. Am J
Emerg Med. 1996 Mar;14(2):218-25. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8924150?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Stickles SP, Carpenter CR, Gekle R, et al. The diagnostic accuracy of a point-of-care ultrasound
protocol for shock etiology: A systematic review and meta-analysis. CJEM. 2019 May;21(3):406-17. 
Full text (https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/canadian-journal-of-emergency-medicine/article/
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Evaluation of shock References
REFERENCES
diagnostic-accuracy-of-a-pointofcare-ultrasound-protocol-for-shock-etiology-a-systematic-review-and-
metaanalysis/28DF4477E868AC9A1E5A2CD70729FCAF)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30696496?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Stengel D, Leisterer J, Ferrada P, et al. Point-of-care ultrasonography for diagnosing thoracoabdominal
injuries in patients with blunt trauma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Dec 12;(12):CD012669. 
Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD012669.pub2/full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30548249?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. McLean AS. Echocardiography in shock management. Crit Care. 2016 Aug 20;20:275.  Full
text (https://ccforum.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13054-016-1401-7)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27543137?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Rady MY, Nightingale P, Little RA, et al. Shock index: a re-evaluation in acute circulatory failure.
Resuscitation. 1992 Jun-Jul;23(3):227-34. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1321482?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Michard F, Ruscio L, Teboul JL. Clinical prediction of fluid responsiveness in acute circulatory failure
related to sepsis. Intensive Care Med. 2001 Jul;27(7):1238. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11534577?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Kristensen AK, Holler JG, Hallas J, et al. Is Shock Index a valid predictor of mortality in emergency
department patients with hypertension, diabetes, high age, or receipt of β- or calcium channel
blockers? Ann Emerg Med. 2016 Jan;67(1):106-13. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/26144893?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Nguyen HB, Rivers EP, Knoblich BP, et al. Early lactate clearance is associated with improved
outcome in severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med. 2004 Aug;32(8):1637-42. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15286537?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Jentzer JC, Schrage B, Patel PC, et al. Association between the acidemia, lactic acidosis, and
shock severity with outcomes in patients with cardiogenic shock. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022 May
3;11(9):e024932.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9238598)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35491996?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Yadav H, Harrison AM, Hanson AC, et al. Improving the accuracy of Cardiovascular Component of the
Sequential Organ Failure Assessment Score. Crit Care Med. 2015 Jul;43(7):1449-57. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25785522?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Cabré L, Mancebo J, Solsona JF, et al; Bioethics Working Group of the SEMICYUC. Multicenter study
of the multiple organ dysfunction syndrome in intensive care units: the usefulness of Sequential Organ
Failure Assessment scores in decision making. Intensive Care Med. 2005 Jul;31(7):927-33. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15856171?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Jones AE, Trzeciak S, Kline JA. The Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score for
predicting outcome in patients with severe sepsis and evidence of hypoperfusion at the time of
emergency department presentation. Crit Care Med. 2009 May;37(5):1649-54.  Full text (https://
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Evaluation of shock References
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2703722)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19325482?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Seymour CW, Liu VX, Iwashyna TJ, et al. Assessment of clinical criteria for sepsis: for the
Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA.
2016 Feb 23;315(8):762-74. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26903335?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Churpek MM, Snyder A, Han X, et al. Quick sepsis-related organ failure assessment, systemic
inflammatory response syndrome, and early warning scores for detecting clinical deterioration
in infected patients outside the intensive care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017 Apr
1;195(7):906-11. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27649072?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58. Muller L, Toumi M, Bousquet PJ, et al. An increase in aortic blood flow after an infusion of 100 ml
colloid over 1 minute can predict fluid responsiveness: the mini-fluid challenge study. Anesthesiology.
2011 Sep;115(3):541-7.  Full text (https://pubs.asahq.org/anesthesiology/article/115/3/541/11167/
An-Increase-in-Aortic-Blood-Flow-after-an-Infusion)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21792056?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Hofer CK, Müller SM, Furrer L, et al. Stroke volume and pulse pressure variation for prediction
of fluid responsiveness in patients undergoing off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting.
Chest. 2005;128:848-854. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16100177?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Michard F, Teboul JL. Predicting fluid responsiveness in ICU patients: a critical analysis of the
evidence. Chest. 2002 Jun;121(6):2000-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12065368?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Cannesson M, Besnard C, Durand PG, et al. Relation between respiratory variations in pulse oximetry
plethysmographic waveform amplitude and arterial pulse pressure in ventilated patients. Crit Care.
2005 Oct 5;9(5):R562-8.  Full text (https://ccforum.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/cc3799)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16277719?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Natalini G, Rosano A, Taranto M, et al. Arterial versus plethysmographic dynamic indices to test
responsiveness for testing fluid administration in hypotensive patients: a clinical trial. Anesth
Analg. 2006 Dec;103(6):1478-84.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/anesthesia-analgesia/
Fulltext/2006/12000/Arterial_Versus_Plethysmographic_Dynamic_Indices.30.aspx)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17122227?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Wyffels PA, Durnez PJ, Helderweirt J, et al. Ventilation-induced plethysmographic variations predict
fluid responsiveness in ventilated postoperative cardiac surgery patients. Anesth Analg. 2007
Aug;105(2):448-52.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/anesthesia-analgesia/Fulltext/2007/08000/
Ventilation_Induced_Plethysmographic_Variations.28.aspx)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17646504?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64. Cherpanath TG, Hirsch A, Geerts BF, et al. Predicting fluid responsiveness by passive leg raising:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of 23 clinical trials. Crit Care Med. 2016 May;44(5):981-91.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26741579?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Evaluation of shock References
REFERENCES
65. Reynolds HR, Hochman JS. Cardiogenic shock: current concepts and improving outcomes.
Circulation. 2008 Feb 5;117(5):686-97.  Full text (https://circ.ahajournals.org/content/117/5/686.full)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18250279?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Pearse R, Dawson D, Fawcett J, et al. Early goal-directed therapy after major surgery reduces
complications and duration of hospital stay. A randomised, controlled trial [ISRCTN38797445].
Crit Care. 2005;9(6):R687-93. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16356219?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Kandel G, Aberman A. Mixed venous oxygen saturation. Its role in the assessment of the critically
ill patient. Arch Intern Med. 1983 Jul;143(7):1400-2. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/6870412?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. Nelson LD. Continuous venous oximetry in surgical patients. Ann Surg. 1986 Mar;203(3):329-33.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3954486?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
69. Reinhart K, Kuhn HJ, Hartog C, et al. Continuous central venous and pulmonary artery oxygen
saturation monitoring in the critically ill. Intensive Care Med. 2004 Aug;30(8):1572-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15197435?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. Rivers EP, Ander DS, Powell D. Central venous oxygen saturation monitoring in the critically ill patient.
Curr Opin Crit Care. 2001 Jun;7(3):204-11. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11436529?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
71. Rivers EP, Rady MY, Martin GB, et al. Venous hyperoxia after cardiac arrest: characterization
of a defect in systemic oxygen utilization. Chest. 1992 Dec;102(6):1787-93. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1446489?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Beal AL, Cerra FB. Multiple organ failure syndrome in the 1990s. Systemic inflammatory response
and organ dysfunction. JAMA. 1994 Jan 19;271(3):226-33. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/8080494?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Varpula M, Tallgren M, Saukkonen K, et al. Hemodynamic variables related to outcome in septic
shock. Intensive Care Med. 2005 Aug;31(8):1066-71. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15973520?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. High-sensitivity troponin tests for the early rule out of
NSTEMI. NICE guideline DG40 diagnostics guidance. Aug 2020 [internet publication]  Full text (https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/dg40)
75. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management
of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022 May 3;145(18):e895-e1032.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001063)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35363499?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. Tenner S, Vege SS, Sheth SG, et al. American College of Gastroenterology Guidelines:
management of acute pancreatitis. Am J Gastroenterol. 2024 Mar 1;119(3):419-37.  Full text (https://
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Evaluation of shock References
journals.lww.com/ajg/fulltext/2024/03000/american_college_of_gastroenterology_guidelines_.14.aspx) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38857482?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
77. American Society for Clinical Pathology. Do not test for amylase in cases of suspected
acute pancreatitis. Instead, test for lipase. Sep 2016 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
www.choosingwisely.org/clinician-lists/american-society-clinical-pathology-testing-for-amylase)
78. Rompianesi G, Hann A, Komolafe O, et al. Serum amylase and lipase and urinary trypsinogen
and amylase for diagnosis of acute pancreatitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Apr 21;
(4):CD012010.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6478262)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28431198?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
79. Leppäniemi A, Tolonen M, Tarasconi A, et al. 2019 WSES guidelines for the management of severe
acute pancreatitis. World J Emerg Surg. 2019;14:27.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC6567462)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31210778?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Anaphylaxis: assessment and referral after
emergency treatment. Aug 2020 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
cg134)
81. Sampson HA, Mendelson L, Rosen JP. Fatal and near-fatal anaphylactic reactions to food in
children and adolescents. N Engl J Med. 1992 Aug 6;327(6):380-4.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/10.1056/NEJM199208063270603?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub
%20%200www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1294076?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Evaluation of shock Images
IMAGES
Images
Figure 1: Sequential (or Sepsis-related) Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) criteria
Created by BMJ, adapted from Vincent JL, Moreno R, Takala J, et al. The SOFA (Sepsis-related Organ
Failure Assessment) score to describe organ dysfunction/failure. On behalf of the Working Group on
Sepsis-Related Problems of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care Med.
1996;22:707-710.
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Evaluation of shock Images
Figure 2: Parameters to differentiate between types of shock and examples
Adapted with permission from "Rady MY. Bench-to-bedside review: Resuscitation in the emergency
department. Crit Care. 2005;9:170-176".
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Evaluation of shock Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Evaluation of shock Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 13, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Samuel J. Stratton, MD, MPH
Professor
Fielding School of Public Health, Professor, The David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA
DISCLOSURES: SJS declares that he has no competing interests.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Samuel J. Stratton would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Patrick Nee, Dr Joseph C. Farmer, and Dr
Srikanth Hosur, the previous contributors to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: PN, JCF, and SH declare that they have no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Armand Mekontso Dessap, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor
Medical Intensive Care Unit, Henri Mondor Hospital, Creteil, France
DISCLOSURES: AMD declares that he has no competing interests.
Ethan Cumbler, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO
DISCLOSURES: EC declares that he has no competing interests.
Haibo Wang, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor
LSU Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA
DISCLOSURES: HW declares that he has no competing interests.
Karim Bendjelid, MD, PhD
Médecin Adjoint Agrégé
Intensive Care Division, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland
DISCLOSURES: KB declares that he has no competing interests.
