# Evaluation of syncope

=== Page 1 ===
Evaluation of syncope
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Jan 05, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Theory  4
Etiology  4
Emergencies  7
Urgent considerations  7
Diagnosis  9
Approach  9
Differentials overview  15
Differentials  17
References  36
Disclaimer  42
=== Page 3 ===
Evaluation of syncope Overview
Summary
Syncope is a sudden and transient loss of consciousness that is associated with a loss of postural tone,
and resolves spontaneously and completely without intervention. Precise incidence rates are difficult to
determine and depend on the features of the population studied. In the United States, syncope accounts
for approximately 0.8% of all emergency department visits and 2% of all hospital admissions from the
emergency department.[1]
Although the pathophysiology of syncope is related to a transient decrease in cerebral blood flow, the causes
of syncope are myriad and range from the benign to the life-threatening.
Physicians must identify patients with potentially life-threatening processes (e.g., dysrhythmias, pulmonary
embolism, subarachnoid hemorrhage, acute coronary syndromes), patients who may require hospitalization
and intervention (e.g., patients with bradycardia or medication-induced orthostatic hypotension), and those
with a more benign cause of syncope who can be discharged.[2]
The history and the physical examination may identify an underlying cause of syncope in many patients.
However, the lack of accurate historical information, and the fact that patients are often asymptomatic at the
time of evaluation, combine to fuel diagnostic uncertainty.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Evaluation of syncope Theory
THEORY
Etiology
The etiologies of syncope are myriad and can be classified in various ways, including cardiac, noncardiac,
and unknown causes.[3] There may be a degree of overlap between cardiac and non-cardiac causes; the
cause of syncope may not be determined (idiopathic etiology) in up to one third of cases.[4]
Syncope is caused by the transient reduction in cerebral blood flow which results in hypoperfusion of
both cerebral hemispheres simultaneously or sections of the brainstem thought to be responsible for the
conscious state (the reticular activating system).
The role of patient age in the diagnostic evaluation of syncope is not clearly defined. Although some studies
suggest the importance of age as a predictor of poorer outcome in patients with syncope of any cause,
others have demonstrated that age is not an independent predictor of adverse outcome in syncope.[5] [6] [7]
While a single pathologic process often causes syncope in younger patients, in older patients it is often
multifactorial. Older patients are especially prone to syncope as a consequence of a combination of
age-related alterations in the cardiovascular system, multiple comorbidities, and the use of numerous
medications.[8]
Cardiac syncope
Defined as syncope caused by bradycardia, tachycardia, or hypotension due to low cardiac index, blood flow
obstruction, vasodilatation, or acute vascular dissection.[9]
Dysrhythmias
Produce syncope by decreasing ventricular filling and stroke volume, resulting in hypotension and diminished
cerebral blood flow. Examples include:
• Ventricular arrhythmias
• Sinus node dysfunction: including bradycardia/tachycardia syndrome
• Atrioventricular conduction system blocks
• Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
• Inherited syndromes: long QT syndromes, Brugada syndrome
• Implanted device malfunction: pacemaker or implantable cardioverter defibrillator; pacemaker
malfunction may produce syncope as a result of bradydysrhythmias or pacemaker-induced tachycardia
• Drug-induced proarrhythmias: sotalol, flecainide, quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide.
Structural cardiac and cardiopulmonary disease
• Cardiac valvular diseases
• aortic or mitral stenosis: severe mitral stenosis is most commonly associated with syncope
during periods of atrial fibrillation; exertional syncope may be due to aortic stenosis[10]
• acute aortic, mitral, or tricuspid insufficiency
• prosthetic valve dysfunction
• Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy: exertional syncope may be due to hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
• Acute myocardial ischemia/infarction: syncope is a relatively rare initial presentation of acute
myocardial infarction and is related to dysrhythmia or pump failure
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Evaluation of syncope Theory
• Atrial myxoma
• Acute aortic dissection
• Pulmonary embolism and pulmonary hypertension: acute pulmonary hypertension can cause a
functional obstruction to pulmonary flow, abruptly decreasing left ventricular preload and thus cardiac
output. This is most likely the mechanism of syncope associated with massive pulmonary embolism. In
patients with chronic pulmonary hypertension, activities that acutely raise intrathoracic pressure, such
as coughing or Valsalva during defecation, can produce the same phenomenon
• Cardiac tamponade: increased pericardial pressure causes compression of the heart chambers and
subsequently decreases cardiac output.
Noncardiac syncope
Reflex (neurally mediated)
This is syncope due to a reflex that causes vasodilation, bradycardia, or both. It has several subtypes.
• Vasovagal syndrome: the most common type of syncope in children and adults.[11] [12]
• Carotid sinus syndrome
• Situational syncope.
Orthostatic
• Dysautonomia:
• Catecholamine disorders: baroreflex failure, dopamine-beta-hydroxylase deficiency,
pheochromocytoma, neuroblastoma, familial paraganglioma syndrome, tetrahydrobiopterin
deficiency
• Central autonomic disorders: multiple system atrophy (Shy-Drager syndrome), Parkinson
disease with autonomic failure
• Orthostatic intolerance syndrome: postural tachycardia syndrome, mitral valve prolapse,
idiopathic hypovolemia
• Paroxysmal autonomic syncopes: neurocardiogenic syncope
• Peripheral autonomic disorders: acute idiopathic polyneuropathy (Guillain-Barre syndrome),
Chagas disease, diabetic autonomic failure, familial dysautonomia, pure autonomic failure
(Bradbury-Eggleston syndrome).
• Hypovolemia
• Diarrhea
• Hemorrhage (may be occult): gastrointestinal bleeding, tissue trauma, ruptured aortic aneurysm,
ruptured ovarian cyst, ruptured ectopic pregnancy, retroperitoneal hemorrhage, ruptured spleen
• Addison disease
• Postexercise
• Postprandial
• Drug-induced (most common cause of orthostatic hypotension): for example, with diuretics,
alpha-adrenergic blocking agents such as prazosin, ACE inhibitors, alcohol, clonidine, tricyclic
antidepressants, phenothiazines, antihistamines, L-dopa, monoamine oxidase inhibitors. The effects of
drugs and their interactions are exacerbated in older people because of the dysautonomia that occurs
with aging.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Evaluation of syncope Theory
THEORY
Anatomic
• Subclavian steal syndrome.
Neurologic
• Subarachnoid hemorrhage: unusual cause of syncope, presumably related to a sudden increase in
intracranial pressure
• Traumatic brain injury: transient reversible hypoperfusion in the brain may be caused by a sudden
increase in intracranial pressure from trauma or other brain injuries that limit cerebral blood flow[13]
• Migraine is uncommonly associated with syncope (may be vasovagal or due to orthostatic intolerance).
Toxic or metabolic
• Drug toxicities (such as antiarrhythmic agents causing proarrhythmic effects)
• Antihypertensive agents (causing orthostatic hypotension)
• Hypoglycemia
• Hypoxia
• Hyperventilation with hypocapnia.
Psychiatric
There is no true impairment of consciousness in these disorders.[14] [15]
• Anxiety
• Cataplexy
• Conversion disorders can sometimes present as syncope.
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Evaluation of syncope Emergencies
Urgent considerations
(See  Differentials  for more details)
It is critical to identify patients with a high risk of death. The presence of structural heart disease or abnormal
ECG findings indicate that a patient may be at high risk of death.[16] Causes of syncope that need to be
excluded urgently include those listed below.
Myocardial infarction and ischemia
An acute myocardial infarction or a remote myocardial infarction, especially with left ventricular dysfunction,
can result in syncope due to ventricular arrhythmia, which can be life-threatening. Patients may have a
history of known coronary artery disease (CAD) and preceding chest pain. ECG should be performed
immediately to look for signs of infarction such as ST-segment elevation, new left bundle branch block, and
arrhythmias.
Cardiac arrhythmias
Bradyarrhythmia and tachyarrhythmia are potentially life-threatening conditions that present with syncope.
A history of CAD, medications that promote AV block or torsades de pointes, and increased age increase
the likelihood of arrhythmias. Less common causes of cardiac arrhythmias associated with sudden death,
such as Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome and inherited cardiac ion channel abnormalities (such as long QT
syndrome and Brugada syndrome), should be excluded.
Occult hemorrhage
Significant hemorrhage from gastrointestinal bleeding, tissue trauma, ruptured aortic aneurysm, ruptured
ovarian cyst, ruptured ectopic pregnancy, retroperitoneal hemorrhage, or ruptured spleen may present with
syncope.
Aortic dissection
Needs to be considered in patients with chest and back pain. ECG may be abnormal if the dissection
involves the coronary vessels, and chest x-ray may show a widened mediastinum; however, definitive testing
with transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) or contrast computed tomography (CT) chest is urgently
required to show the intimal flap and false lumen of aortic dissection.
Cardiac tamponade
May be caused by acute myocardial infarction, aortic dissection, trauma, hypothyroidism, or pericarditis.
Immediate pericardiocentesis is required.
Severe hypoglycemia
Severe hypoglycemia due to excessive administration of insulin, hepatic disease, or islet of Langerhans
tumor may cause syncope. All patients presenting acutely with syncope should have blood glucose level
measured as part of the initial assessment.
Hypoglycemia and associated loss of consciousness is generally not transient unless treated, and thus
hypoglycemia is often excluded from studies of syncope.
EMERGENCIES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Evaluation of syncope Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
Addison disease
Acute, life-threatening addisonian crisis can present with syncope, nausea and vomiting, fever, hypotension,
hyperpigmentation, and electrolyte abnormalities. Presumptive treatment with hydrocortisone is required to
correct hypotension.[17]
Massive pulmonary embolism
Saddle pulmonary embolus produces cardiac outflow obstruction, resulting in decreased cerebral perfusion
and syncope.[18] Prospective studies report pulmonary embolism in between 2.3% and 25.3% of patients
hospitalized with syncope.[19]
The history needs to include possible thromboembolic (TE) risk factors, such as previous TE disease,
prolonged immobilization (e.g., flight >4 hours), smoking, oral contraceptive pill or hormone replacement
therapy, known malignancy, or family history of TE.
The history needs to include possible thromboembolic (TE) risk factors, such as previous TE disease,
prolonged immobilization (e.g., flight >4 hours), smoking, oral contraceptive pill or hormone replacement
therapy use, known malignancy, or family history of TE.
Urgent evaluation with a CT pulmonary angiogram, ventilation/perfusion scan, D-dimer, or TEE (showing
right heart failure or extension of thrombus in pulmonary artery) can help make the diagnosis, and ECG
changes of S1Q3T3 or right bundle branch block may also be seen. Arterial blood gases can quantify the
degree of hypoxia.[20]
Thrombolysis should be considered for patients with massive pulmonary embolism causing cardiogenic
shock.[21]
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Headache, particularly when ‘thunderclap’ in nature, or the appearance of focal neurologic signs in a patient
with syncope, should raise subarachnoid hemorrhage as a potential cause.
There is no utility in routinely obtaining a head CT scan in patients with syncope because lack of either a
headache or abnormal neurologic examination adequately rules out subarachnoid hemorrhage as the cause
etiology of the syncopal event.
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Approach
The initial steps when assessing a patient with suspected syncope are to differentiate syncope from
nonsyncopal conditions, such as seizures, falls, psychogenic pseudosyncope, drop attacks, and transient
ischemic attacks, and to try to identify the cause (mechanism) so that appropriate treatment may be
offered.[11] Data from several studies have shown that history and physical exam can identify a potential
cause of syncope in many patients whose primary disorder can be diagnosed.[11] [22]
The next step is to assess the specific risk to the patient.[9] [11] For instance, the presence of structural heart
disease or abnormal ECG findings indicates that an individual may be at higher risk of death.[16]
History
Syncope and nonsyncopal conditions, with real or apparent loss of consciousness, can be differentiated in
most cases with a detailed clinical history, but this may sometimes be extremely difficult.[23] [24]
When a patient presents to the emergency department, it is important to correctly differentiate benign from
potentially life-threatening causes of syncope. Red flag symptoms indicating the latter include: chest pain,
palpitations, back pain, hematemesis, melena before the syncopal episode, and syncope with exercise.[10]
[25] Palpitations before loss of consciousness are a significant predictor of a cardiac cause of syncope.[26]
A detailed account of the event is taken from the patient or bystander. Precipitating factors, prodrome of
symptoms, patient's position at the time of event, duration of syncope, recovery time, and family history are
all important points to be considered. The history helps to narrow the differential diagnosis, and aims to
identify risk for conditions linked with a poor prognosis.[9]
Specific triggers
Situational syncope with activities, including coughing, swallowing, micturition, and defecation, suggests
that the cause is neurally mediated or vasovagal. Neurally mediated syncope is frequently recurrent
and precipitated by fatigue, hot environment, severe pain, starvation, alcohol consumption, emotional or
stressful situations, and prolonged standing. The patient is usually in the standing position and complains of
prodromal symptoms of feeling weak, and may have nausea, diaphoresis, palpitations, blurring of vision, and
becomes noticeably pale. Fatigue is common after regaining consciousness.
Syncope while shaving or turning the head to one side may be related to carotid sinus hypersensitivity,
affecting mainly men aged ≥50 years.
Differentiating between syncope and epileptic seizure
Differentiating between syncope and epileptic seizure can sometimes be challenging. Information obtained
from onlookers can help narrow the diagnosis. Seizures are typically associated with longer duration of loss
of consciousness, loss of bowel and bladder control, rhythmic clonic movements, and disorientation after
the episode. While tongue biting can occur in patients with syncope, it greatly increases the chance that the
patient has had an epileptic seizure.[27]
Twitching and jerking are often seen with vasovagal or cardiac syncope, but these can be differentiated
from rhythmic jerking of all the limbs in tonic-clonic seizures. Further testing is required when the diagnosis
remains uncertain.[12]
Past medical history
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Taking a past medical history is important, particularly noting any known cardiovascular conditions.[9]
Patients with advanced congestive heart failure, with low mean ejection fraction (<20%) and syncope, have
increased risk of ventricular arrhythmia and 1-year mortality of 45%.[28] Some patients with pulmonary
arterial hypertension have a history of syncope at the time of presentation, which is an independent predictor
of a poor prognosis.[29]
Symptomatic patients with Brugada syndrome have a higher risk of sudden death than do asymptomatic
patients.[30] [31] Patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy who have had an episode of syncope also have
a high risk of sudden death.[32]
People with psychogenic pseudosyncope often have a history of frequent, recurrent episodes. The duration
of apparent loss of consciousness is often long. It is more common in young women and there is a higher
prevalence in people with a history of physical or sexual abuse.[9] [33]
Family history
A family history of syncope is important. Patients with exertional syncope and positive family history of
syncope or sudden cardiac death are at increased risk of sudden death, and need further evaluation to rule
out cardiac causes of syncope such as prolonged QT syndrome.
Medication history
A detailed medication history should be obtained and may provide useful information that suggests a
possible cause of the syncopal episode. Drug classes that have been implicated in syncopal episodes
include: diuretics, vasodilators, venodilators, negative chronotropes, and sedatives.[9]
Vasoactive medications, including antihypertensive agents, antianginal medications, and medications used to
treat erectile dysfunction, may lead to syncope because of their vasodilatory effects.
Medication interactions may prolong the QT interval and lead to potentially life-threatening dysrhythmias.
Elderly patients in particular are more susceptible to medication effects that may cause syncope, and close
attention should be directed to potential medication interactions in these individuals.
Physical exam and ECG
Vital sign abnormalities, including persistent tachycardia or hypotension, are concerning and must prompt a
search for an underlying cause.
Blood pressure should be checked in both arms in supine and standing positions, on immediate standing,
and after 3 minutes of standing.[9] Orthostatic hypotension is defined, by consensus, as a fall in systolic
blood pressure of at least 20 mmHg and/or a fall in diastolic blood pressure of at least 10 mmHg within 3
minutes of standing.[34] The European Cardiology Society has added a fall in systolic blood pressure to <90
mmHg after 3 minutes of standing to the criteria for diagnosis of orthostatic hypotension.[11]
Orthostatic hypotension may identify some patients with syncope related to volume depletion, autonomic
insufficiency, or medications.[34] However, it is a common finding in asymptomatic patients. The diagnosis of
orthostatic hypotension as the sole cause of syncope should probably represent a diagnosis of exclusion in
high-risk patients, because many high-risk patients also have orthostasis.
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Pulse rate and rhythm are useful in the diagnosis of arrhythmias and pulmonary embolism. Cardiac
auscultation may reveal murmurs (e.g., of aortic stenosis, atrial myxoma, and pulmonary arterial
hypertension).
A basic neurologic exam is required. The presence of sensory, motor, speech, or vision deficits suggests an
underlying neurologic problem requiring further investigation or referral. In patients with suspected carotid
hypersensitivity, carotid sinus massage may reproduce the symptoms. Carotid sinus massage should not be
performed in patients who have experienced transient ischemic attack or stroke within the past 3 months or
in patients with carotid bruits (unless carotid Doppler studies convincingly exclude significant carotid artery
narrowing).[11]
A 12-lead ECG should be performed on every patient presenting with syncope.[9] [35]
Risk assessment
The 2017 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association/Heart Rhythm Society (ACC/AHA/
HRS) guideline for the evaluation and management of patients with syncope recommends assessing
short-term (up to 30 days after syncope) and long-term (up to 12 months of follow-up) risk of morbidity and
mortality in people presenting with syncope in the outpatient clinic or emergency department.[9]
Short-term risk factors
• Male
• No prodrome
• Palpitations preceding loss of consciousness
• Exertional syncope
• Structural heart disease
• Heart failure
• Cerebrovascular disease
• Family history of sudden cardiac death
• Trauma
• Evidence of bleeding
• Persistent abnormal vital signs
• Positive troponin.
Long-term risk factors
• Male
• Older age
• Absence of nausea/vomiting preceding syncopal event
• Ventricular arrhythmia
• Cancer
• Structural heart disease
• Heart failure
• Cerebrovascular disease
• High CHADS-2 score
• Abnormal ECG
• Abnormal glomerular filtration rate.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
The ACC/AHA/HRS guideline also considers factors associated with intermediate risk, where structured
observation in the emergency department may be considered:[9]
• 50 years of age or older
• Prior history of cardiac disease
• Cardiac device without evidence of dysfunction
• Concerning ECG findings
• Family history of early sudden cardiac death
• Symptoms not consistent with reflex-mediated syncope.
When the cause of syncope is unclear and the patient falls into the intermediate risk group, the use of a
structured emergency department observation protocol may be effective as a means of reducing hospital
admission.[9]
Predictors of short-term adverse outcomes
Often, despite a thorough history and physical examination, no obvious cause of syncope is identified. In
these cases, it is important to identify those patients at highest risk of serious short-term outcomes.
A number of studies have attempted to identify predictors of short-term adverse outcomes in patients
presenting to the emergency department (ED) and whose initial workup did not reveal an obvious cause of
syncope.[7] [36] [37]
Patients who are clinically considered to be at intermediate or high risk for dysrhythmia or sudden death
should be admitted to an inpatient unit, observation unit, or other monitored area. Although the definition of
high- and low-risk patients is not consistent across studies, certain clinical and diagnostic features confer a
lower or higher risk of adverse outcomes, including dysrhythmia.[36] [37]
Patients thought to be low risk are those with syncope at a younger age (<40 years), syncope that occurred
while in a standing position, or when moving from a sitting/supine position to standing, syncope triggered by
a painful or emotionally distressing situation, or by cough, micturition or defecation.[7] [36]
Patients with near syncope (patients who feel like they are going to pass out, but do not) have similar risks for
adverse outcome when compared with patients with transient loss of consciousness, and should be treated
similarly.[38]
Patients presenting to the ED with syncope determined to be of benign etiology (clearly vasovagal or
dehydration related) with a negative ED workup should be considered for discharge regardless of the
presence of other risk factors.
Ancillary tests
Further investigations needs to be individualized so that the workup is cost-effective and appropriate.[9]
The diagnosis of vasovagal syncope is based mostly on the history, physical examination, and eyewitness
observation, if available, so further testing in this group may not be needed in healthy individuals. However,
features may not be typical in older people, making the diagnosis less clear.[9]
Blood tests may be useful and need to be tailored for a particular patient.[9] In practice, it is common to
measure cardiac enzymes (e.g., high-sensitivity troponin) in all patients presenting in hospital with syncope,
although the 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline recommends targeting people with signs suggestive of acute
myocardial infarction, such as chest pain or dyspnea.[9] 
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Complete blood count (CBC) and blood glucose levels are useful routine tests. In an unselected group of
patients presenting to the emergency department with syncope from any cause, a hematocrit <30% was an
important predictor of adverse events.[39]
Uremia and electrolyte abnormalities can cause seizures, and testing may help make the diagnosis in
patients in whom seizure activity cannot be excluded. Elevated creatine kinase may also suggest seizures.
In patients with anemia, stool guaiac examination should be considered to evaluate for occult gastrointestinal
(GI) blood loss as a possible cause of syncope. To assess for colorectal cancer, the US and UK guidelines
report risk thresholds for testing symptomatic patients.[40] [41] [42] The UK’s National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE) recommends certain quantitative fecal immunochemical tests (FITs) to recognize
and guide referral of patients at risk of colorectal cancer.[41] [42]
Pregnancy testing is required for all sexually active women of childbearing age. Blood and urine toxicology
screens are performed on patients with high clinical suspicion for alcohol misuse or illicit drug use, or in
patients with no obvious cause for syncope on history and exam.
Chest x-ray may be useful as a baseline.[43] It is an important initial test in some clinical circumstances, such
as myocardial infarction, aortic dissection, and perforated peptic ulcer. There is no evidence to suggest that
routine screening of patients with advanced imaging (such as computed tomography [CT] scans), functional
cardiac echocardiography, or electrophysiological testing is indicated.[44]
If a cardiovascular cause is suspected
If a cardiac cause is suspected on ECG, transthoracic echocardiography is done to evaluate for the presence
of organic heart disease.[43] One retrospective study of adults hospitalized with syncope found that 44% of
patients with an abnormal physical exam or ECG had a significant echocardiographic finding, compared with
10% of patients who had a normal physical exam and normal ECG.[45]
Patients with organic heart disease as inpatients with, for example, electrophysiology studies, Holter
monitors, and loop recorders for 24 to 48 hours. Various types of cardiac monitoring devices exist; choice
is based on the frequency and nature of the syncopal events.[9] Electrophysiological studies may be
considered in select patients where the etiology is suspected to be an arrhythmia. 
In some patients, exercise testing or cardiac catheterization is necessary to confirm the presence of
coronary artery disease. Exercise testing may also be used in select patients who have reported syncope or
presyncopal symptoms associated with exercise. However, extreme caution is required and this test should
only be performed in a suitable environment where advanced life support is available.[9]
In patients with suspected atrial myxoma, transesophageal echocardiography and cardiac magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) are used to demonstrate the tumor. CT chest with contrast is indicated to
visualize the abnormal aorta wall in patients with aortic dissection. Abdominal ultrasound (along with
blood chemistries) is performed on people with suspected ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm. Duplex
ultrasonography is done in people with suspected subclavian steal syndrome.
CT or MRI may be used if a cardiac cause is suspected but initial evaluation is inconclusive. If
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) or cardiac sarcoidosis is suspected, MRI may
be considered.[9] Right ventricular angiography may also be performed if ARVC is suspected. 18F-
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography may be considered if cardiac sarcoidosis is suspected. 
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Chest x-ray, D-dimer, CT pulmonary angiography, ventilation/perfusion scan, or pulmonary angiography are
indicated in suspected pulmonary embolism (PE). The choice of investigation depends on the likelihood of
PE and the patient’s comorbidities.
If a neurologic (including neurally mediated) cause is suspected
Tilt table test may be performed in apparently healthy young patients, or patients with recurrent syncope
with a suspected neurally mediated (vasovagal) syncope. A positive tilt-table test suggests a tendency to
vasovagal syncope, but does not provide a definitive diagnosis.
Hemodynamic testing and autonomic reflex testing are performed to evaluate dysautonomia.
Head CT scan is done in patients with neurologic deficits or trauma to the head secondary to a fall from
syncope.[46]
MRI, carotid Doppler ultrasonography, and magnetic resonance angiography are ordered to evaluate
vertebrobasilar atherosclerosis in patients presenting with neurologic deficits.
If seizure cannot be excluded, electroencephalography should be requested.
If obstetric, gastrointestinal, or endocrine cause is suspected
Transvaginal ultrasound is done in pregnant women to exclude ectopic pregnancy. A urine pregnancy test
may also be followed up with serum human chorionic gonadotropin.
CBC and blood chemistries are performed in all patients with (suspected) gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding.
In upper GI bleeding, esophagogastroduodenoscopy may demonstrate underlying esophageal, gastric, or
duodenal disease, whereas colonoscopy is performed in lower GI bleeding.
Additional laboratory testing for C-peptide and sulfonylurea levels is indicated in suspected hypoglycemia.
Patients with suspected Addison disease require measurement of electrolytes and morning serum cortisol,
adrenocorticotropic hormone (stimulation test), and a CT abdomen.
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Differentials overview
Common
Acute coronary syndrome
Ventricular arrhythmias
Atrioventricular block
Acute atrial fibrillation
Congestive heart failure
Volume depletion
Sinus node dysfunction
Aortic stenosis
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding
Lower gastrointestinal bleeding
Neurally mediated
Orthostatic hypotension
Migraine
Seizure
Uncommon
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome/preexcitation syndrome
Cardiac tamponade
Aortic dissection
Pulmonary embolism
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
Brugada syndrome
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Long QT syndrome
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
Mitral stenosis
Atrial myxoma
Cardiac sarcoidosis
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
Subclavian steal syndrome
Implantable cardiac device malfunction
Ectopic pregnancy
Hypoglycemia
Addison disease
Vertebrobasilar transient ischemic attack
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Psychogenic pseudosyncope
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Differentials
Common
Acute coronary syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of coronary
artery disease (CAD);
risk factors for CAD
(increasing age,
male, hypertension,
diabetes, obesity,
hyperlipidemia); chest
pain, palpitations,
dyspnea, weakness,
lightheadedness
pale, diaphoretic;
may have low BP;
may be brady- or
tachycardic; audible S3
or S4; jugular venous
distention if right
ventricular failure from
inferior wall myocardial
infarction (MI); signs
of congestive heart
failure (CHF) such as
peripheral edema and
bibasilar rales
»ECG: ST-segment
elevation or depression,
dynamic T-wave
changes, new-onset left
bundle branch block
»cardiac enzymes:
elevated in ST-elevation
MI (STEMI) and non-
STEMI (NSTEMI); not
elevated in unstable
angina
»chest x-ray:
increased alveolar
markings; cardiomegaly
Pulmonary edema
causes increased
alveolar markings
and can be caused
by ischemia
secondary to acute
coronary syndrome.
Cardiomegaly suggests
concomitant CHF.
»echocardiography:
wall motion
abnormalities,
decreased ejection
fraction
»coronary
angiography:
coronary anomalies;
STEMI: critical
occlusion of a coronary
artery; NSTEMI and
unstable angina:
evidence of coronary
artery narrowing
Ventricular arrhythmias
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
recent or remote
myocardial infarction
(MI); history of coronary
artery disease,
previous cardiac arrest,
mitral or aortic valve
stenosis, or structural
heart disease; family
history of sudden
death; may occur in
the supine position or
with exertion; absent
may be asymptomatic
at presentation with
no physical finding; or
hypoxemia, pulmonary
rales, jugular venous
distention, and
hypotension
»ECG: Q waves
or signs of old MI;
prolonged QT interval;
delta waves if Wolff-
Parkinson-White
syndrome
»cardiac enzymes:
normal, unless
associated with MI
»chest x-ray:
increased alveolar
markings, cardiomegaly
Pulmonary edema
causes increased
alveolar markings and
can be caused by
ischemia secondary to
ventricular arrhythmias.
Cardiomegaly suggests
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
Ventricular arrhythmias
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
or brief prodrome (<5
seconds) of palpitation
and lightheadedness
preceding syncope;
valve replacement
within the last 6 months
concomitant congestive
heart failure.
»echocardiography:
hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy,
valvular heart disease,
low ejection fraction
»external cardiac
monitoring (e.g.,
Holter monitor)
or in-hospital
telemetry: multiform
premature ventricular
complexes, couplets,
nonsustained
ventricular tachycardia
(VT); arrhythmias
associated with
symptoms
»implantable
cardiac monitor:
multiform premature
ventricular complexes,
couplets, nonsustained
VT; arrhythmias
associated with
symptoms
»exercise test:
exercise-induced
arrhythmia, congenital
long QT syndrome;
catecholaminergic
polymorphic VT
»electrophysiology
studies: induction of
monomorphic VT
»coronary
angiography:
coronary obstruction,
congenital
abnormalities, valvular
abnormalities, coronary
anomalies
Cardiac abnormalities
can predispose to
arrhythmias.
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Common
Atrioventricular block
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
older age; history
of coronary artery
disease or structural
heart disease; use of
medications resulting
in atrioventricular (AV)
block (such as beta-
blockers, calcium-
channel blockers,
amiodarone); dizziness;
fatigue; presyncope
bradycardia; irregular
pulse; cannon a-waves
in the jugular venous
pulsation (if third-
degree block)
»ECG: first-, second-,
or third-degree block
First-degree block:
prolonged PR interval
(>200 milliseconds).
Second-degree block:
more p waves than
QRS complexes but
clear relationship
between p waves
and QRS complexes,
Mobitz I (Wenckebach)
block (gradual
prolongation of PR
interval leading up
to nonconducted p
wave) or Mobitz II (non-
Wenckebach) block
(blockage of every
other p wave).
Third-degree block:
more p waves than
QRS complexes but
no clear relationship
between p waves
and QRS complexes,
ventricular rate typically
30-40 bpm.
»external cardiac
monitoring (e.g.,
Holter monitor)
or in-hospital
telemetry: transient
AV block, sinus pauses
»implantable
cardiac monitor:
transient AV block,
sinus pauses
»electrophysiology
studies: determination
of atrium-His and His-
ventricle intervals
◊ Acute atrial fibrillation
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of coronary
artery disease or
structural heart
disease; may occur in
the supine position;
history of presyncope;
chest pain, dyspnea,
blurred vision,
irregularly irregular
pulse with or without
rapid ventricular rate;
sign of congestive
heart failure (CHF)
such as pulmonary
rales, jugular venous
distention, hypotension
»ECG: irregularly
irregular QRS rhythm
with absent p waves
»chest x-ray:
cardiomegaly;
pulmonary edema
»external cardiac
monitoring (e.g.,
Holter monitor)
or in-hospital
telemetry: to establish
type of atrial fibrillation;
may have paroxysmal
nature
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Acute atrial fibrillation
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
weakness, and
palpitations before
syncope[26]
Pulmonary edema
causes increased
alveolar markings and
can be caused by
ischemia secondary to
acute atrial fibrillation.
Cardiomegaly suggests
concomitant CHF.
»cardiac enzymes:
normal unless
underlying or resultant
ischemia
»implantable
cardiac monitor: to
establish type of atrial
fibrillation; may have
paroxysmal nature
»echocardiography:
valvular heart disease;
left atrial dilation;
reduced left ventricular
ejection fraction
Used to assess
underlying cardiac
disease.
◊ Congestive heart failure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
palpitations, fatigue,
dyspnea, presyncope,
orthopnea, paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea
pulmonary congestion;
S3 gallop; lower
extremity edema,
jugular venous
distention
»ECG: evidence of
underlying coronary
artery disease, left
ventricular hypertrophy,
or atrial enlargement;
may be conduction
abnormalities and
abnormal QRS duration
»chest x-ray:
cardiomegaly;
pulmonary edema
»echocardiography:
low ejection fraction
»external cardiac
monitoring
(e.g., Holter
monitor) or in-
hospital telemetry:
frequent episodes
of nonsustained
ventricular tachycardia
»B-type natriuretic
peptide (BNP) or
N-terminal pro-
BNP (NT-proBNP):
elevated
BNP and NT-proBNP
are produced by
ventricular myocytes
subjected to high
stretch. In emergency
settings, natriuretic
peptide biomarker
levels may be more
useful for ruling out
than ruling in heart
failure.[47]
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Common
◊ Volume depletion
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
dizziness, lethargy,
decreased urine output;
history of cause, such
as vomiting, diarrhea,
or excessive diuretic
use
tachycardia,
hypotension, dry
mucosa, poor skin
turgor
»BP supine and
standing: decrease
of at least 20 mmHg in
systolic BP or at least
10 mmHg in diastolic
BP within 3 minutes of
standing
»BUN: elevated
»serum creatinine:
may be elevated
»serum electrolytes:
may be hypernatremia
◊ Sinus node dysfunction
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
lightheadedness,
weakness, palpitations,
dyspnea, angina
bradycardia; a sinus
pause >3 seconds;
heart rate does not
change with Valsalva
maneuver
»ECG: sinus pauses >3
seconds
»external cardiac
monitoring
(e.g., Holter
monitor) or in-
hospital telemetry:
sinus pauses >3
seconds; bradycardia,
tachycardia-bradycardia
syndrome
Used for patients with
paroxysmal symptoms.
»implantable
cardiac monitor:
sinus pauses >3
seconds; bradycardia,
tachycardia-bradycardia
syndrome
Used for patients with
paroxysmal symptoms.
»electrophysiology
studies: measures
sinus nodal recovery
time by overdrive
suppression of the
sinus node and
sinoatrial conduction
time
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Sinus node dysfunction
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Becoming an unpopular
option in day-to-day
practice.
◊ Aortic stenosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
exertional dyspnea,
angina, dizziness,
syncope; late stages
develop congestive
heart failure (dyspnea,
paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea, peripheral
edema)
harsh ejection systolic
murmur that radiates
to carotids, murmur
loudest at the left
sternal edge and on
squatting, and softer
with Valsalva and
isometric exercises;
slow rising pulse; low
carotid volume; S4 with
systolic thrill; signs
of congestive heart
failure (pulmonary
rales, lower extremity
edema, jugular
venous distention,
hepatomegaly)
»ECG: left ventricular
hypertrophy (LVH); ST
segment depression
from left ventricular
strain
»chest x-ray:
cardiomegaly;
pulmonary edema
Aortic stenosis can
cause LVH and
pulmonary edema.
»echocardiography:
evaluates the valve
area (severity of
stenosis); mean
atrioventricular
gradient; LVH; ejection
fraction
»cardiac
catheterization:
aortic and left ventricle
pressure gradient;
severity of stenosis;
measures left ventricle
end-diastolic volume
and end-systolic
volume
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of peptic ulcer
disease; history of
aspirin or nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drug
use; history alcohol
excess; epigastric
abdominal pain;
hematemesis; melena;
dizziness
tachycardia,
hypotension, abdominal
tenderness and
guarding; decreased
bowel sounds; digital
rectal exam showing
melena or positive fecal
occult blood
»CBC: low Hb
»blood chemistries:
elevated BUN/
creatinine ratio
»chest x-ray: free air
under diaphragm
If perforated peptic
ulcer present.
»esophagogastroduodenoscopy:
gastritis, duodenitis,
peptic ulcer,
esophageal varices, or
Mallory-Weiss tear
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Common
Lower gastrointestinal bleeding
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of diverticular
disease; weight loss;
constipation; abdominal
pain; rectal bleeding
tachycardia,
hypotension, abdominal
tenderness and
guarding; decreased
bowel sounds; digital
rectal exam showing
mass or positive for
fecal occult blood
»CBC: low Hb
»blood chemistries:
elevated BUN/
creatinine ratio
»colonoscopy:
bleeding from
diverticular disease,
polyps, or mass
»stool guaiac or
quantitative fecal
immunochemical
test: positive for blood
Guaiac can react with
food or medication
leading to a false-
positive result, but
quantitative fecal
immunochemical
tests (FITs) use
antibodies specific
to the globin part of
human hemoglobin to
detect small amounts
of blood.[42] [52]
 As globin degrades
while traversing the
gastrointestinal tract,
theoretically these
tests are less likely
to detect globin from
upper gastrointestinal
bleeding.[52] The US
and UK guidelines
report risk thresholds
for testing symptomatic
patients.[40] [41] [42]
The UK’s National
Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE)
recommends certain
quantitative FITs for the
recognition and referral
of patients at risk of
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
Lower gastrointestinal bleeding
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
colorectal cancer.[41]
[42]
◊ Neurally mediated
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
recurrent episodes;
duration of symptoms
>4 years; history
presyncope; prodromal
symptoms such as
nausea and vomiting;
precipitated by sudden
exposure to unpleasant
sight, smell, or noxious
stimuli, coughing,
swallowing, defecation,
micturition, Valsalva
maneuver (e.g.,
trumpet playing),
postprandial, head
rotation or pressure
on carotid sinus (e.g.,
tight collars, shaving),
prolonged standing;
history of cardiac
disease is usually
absent
hypotension;
bradycardia; may be a
carotid bruit; if carotid
hypersensitivity: carotid
massage causes
reduction in systolic
BP ≥50 mmHg and/
or sinus pause ≥3
seconds; carotid sinus
massage should not be
performed in patients
who have experienced
transient ischemic
attack or stroke within
the past 3 months
or in patients with
carotid bruits (unless
carotid Doppler studies
convincingly exclude
significant carotid artery
narrowing).[11]
»ECG: normal
Performed to exclude
cardiac causes of
syncope.
»no initial test:
clinical diagnosis
»tilt table testing:
positive if syncope
occurs or prodromal
symptoms develop over
time
Head-up tilt table used
to stand patient at 70°
for 45 minutes.
Used to confirm
dysautonomia.
Isoproterenol and
nitroglycerin use
increases sensitivity of
the test but decreases
specificity.
◊ Orthostatic hypotension
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
precipitated by
standing up, prolonged
standing, or strenuous
activity; may be other
features of autonomic
dysfunction, such as
erectile dysfunction or
disturbed micturition;
history of medications
causing hypotension
or recent change of
dosage; history of
Parkinson disease,
BP and heart rate are
obtained while patient
is supine then while
standing; orthostatic
hypotension if 20
mmHg drop in systolic
BP or 10 mmHg
drop in diastolic BP
within 3 minutes of
standing; postural
tachycardia syndrome if
absence of a significant
change in BP within
5 minutes of standing
»BP supine and
standing: decrease
of at least 20 mmHg in
systolic BP or at least
10 mmHg in diastolic
BP within 3 minutes of
standing
»ECG: normal
Performed to exclude
cardiac causes of
syncope.
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Common
◊ Orthostatic hypotension
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
diabetes, or Shy-Drager
syndrome
or upright tilt with an
increase in heart rate
of ≥30bpm associated
with manifestations
of orthostatic
intolerance[34]
◊ Migraine
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
associated with basilar
artery migraine,
premonitory aura
terminates in loss of
consciousness that is
slow in onset; occipital
headache associated
with diplopia, vertigo,
tinnitus, visual
changes, and syncope;
strong association with
menstrual cycle
no significant physical
finding on examination
»no initial test:
clinical diagnosis
»MRI and magnetic
resonance
angiography: should
be normal
Used to exclude other
pathologies.
◊ Seizure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
younger age (<45
years); duration of
unconsciousness
>5 minutes; sudden
onset or brief aura
(deja vu, olfactory,
gustatory, visual);
disorientation and
drowsiness following an
event; urinary or fecal
incontinence; tonic-
clonic movements
tongue biting,
particularly if it
is lateral, has a
high specificity for
convulsive seizures;
disorientation[9] [27]
»electrolytes and
glucose: low sodium,
calcium, magnesium, or
glucose
»EEG: epileptiform
discharges
Guidelines for
evaluating syncope
suggest that EEGs be
obtained only when
likelihood of epilepsy is
relatively high.[9]
May be useful
simultaneously
with hemodynamic
monitoring and tilt-
table testing, if difficult
»CT head or MRI:
structural abnormality
such as tumors
Not indicated
in patients with
uncomplicated syncope
but may be done to
establish a specific
diagnosis of underlying
conditions that can
cause seizures.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Seizure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
to distinguish among
convulsive syncope,
epileptic convulsions,
and pseudosyncope.
Uncommon
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome/preexcitation syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
presyncope,
palpitations,
lightheadedness;
history of recurrent
tachycardia/
supraventricular
tachycardia; family
history of sudden
cardiac death
diaphoretic, tachycardia »ECG: PR interval
<0.12 seconds; wide
QRS complex >0.12
seconds with delta
wave; secondary ST-T
wave changes[35]
»electrophysiology
study: demonstration
of accessory pathway
Cardiac tamponade
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
underlying cause such
as myocardial infarction
(MI), aortic dissection,
or trauma; may present
insidiously as a result
of pericarditis or,
rarely, hypothyroidism;
dizziness; dyspnea;
fatigue
hypotension, distended
neck veins, muffled
heart sounds; pulsus
paradoxus (a drop of
≥10 mmHg in arterial
BP on inspiration)
»ECG: low-voltage
QRS; other changes
depend on underlying
cause, e.g., ST
elevation in acute MI or
nonspecific ST changes
in pericarditis
»chest x-ray: globular
heart (if large effusion)
»echocardiography:
pericardial effusion
causing collapse of
great vessels and
ventricles
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Uncommon
Aortic dissection
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
chest and back pain,
tearing in nature;
history of connective
tissue disease, such
as Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome or Marfan
syndrome
hypotensive; unequal
pulses or BP in both
arms; acute pulmonary
edema; focal neurologic
sign of weakness,
dysarthria, cranial
nerve defects if carotid
arteries involved
»ECG: ST- and T-wave
ischemic changes
Cardiac ischemia
occurs if low dissection
involving the coronary
arteries.
»chest x-ray: widened
mediastinum
»transesophageal
echocardiography:
false lumen or flap
in the ascending or
descending aorta; new
aortic regurgitation or
pericardial tamponade
»CT chest with
contrast: false lumen
or flap in the ascending
or descending aorta
Pulmonary embolism
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
dizziness, shortness
of breath, pleuritic
chest pain, hemoptysis;
risk factors for
thromboembolic
disease, such
as previous
thromboembolism,
recent limb
trauma, prolonged
immobilization,
contraceptive pill
use, or underlying
malignancy
tachycardia; tachypnea;
hypotension; loud
P2; jugular venous
distention; right
ventricular lift
»ECG: sinus
tachycardia; presence
of S1, Q3, and T3
Usually nonspecific.
»D-dimer: nonspecific
if positive; pulmonary
embolism excluded if
negative
Utility is in its negative
predictive value.
»chest x-ray:
decreased perfusion
in a segment of
pulmonary vasculature
(Westermark sign);
presence of pleural
effusion
Useful to exclude other
causes of dyspnea or
chest pain
»CT pulmonary
angiography:
identification of
thrombus in the
pulmonary circulation
»V/Q scan: ventilation/
perfusion mismatch
Useful in patients for
whom CT pulmonary
angiography in
contraindicated (e.g.
pregnancy, renal
failure)
»arterial blood
gases: hypoxemia
»pulmonary
angiography:
identification of
thrombus in the
pulmonary circulation
Definitive test, rarely
performed because it is
invasive.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
abdominal and back
pain
tachycardia,
hypotension, abdominal
tenderness; pulsatile
abdominal mass;
decreased bowel
sounds
»CBC: decreased Hb
»blood chemistries:
elevation in BUN and
creatinine
»abdominal
ultrasound:
aneurysm;
intraluminal thrombus;
retroperitoneal
hematoma
»CT angiography:
may demonstrate
retroperitoneal
hematoma,
discontinuity of
the aortic wall, or
extravasation of
contrast into the
peritoneal cavity
Also useful in
diagnosing aortic
aneurysms close to the
origins of, or proximal
to, the renal arteries
◊ Brugada syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
southeast Asian
ethnicity; history of
syncope and seizures;
family history of
sudden cardiac death
at young age;[48]
recurrent episodes
of self-terminating
ventricular tachycardia
(VT); symptomatic
patients have a
greater risk of sudden
death compared
with asymptomatic
patients[31][49]
normal physical exam »ECG: ST-segment
elevation in right
precordial leads (V1-
V3) and right bundle
branch block
»electrophysiology
study: induction of VT
◊ Long QT syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of syncope;
cardiac arrest; family
history of sudden death
at young age; ECG
finding of long QT
syndrome (LQTS) in
family member
exam usually normal;
occasionally associated
with syndactyly; other
associated syndromes
such as Jervell
and Lange-Nielsen
syndrome (hearing
loss) and Andersen
»ECG: prolongation
of QT interval; varies
inversely with heart rate
T-wave alternans is
a rare but diagnostic
characteristic of
LQTS; bizarre-looking,
»external cardiac
monitoring (e.g.,
Holter monitor)
or in-hospital
telemetry: episode of
torsades de pointes
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Long QT syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
syndrome (scoliosis
and short stature)
pronounced U waves;
U-wave alternans may
also be seen.[35]
Diagnostic for
LQTS.[50]
»implantable
cardiac monitor:
episode of torsades de
pointes
Diagnostic for
LQTS.[50]
◊ Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
young age; family
history of sudden
death; dizziness;
dyspnea; angina;
palpitations; heart
failure; presyncope
ejection systolic
murmur (does not
radiate to carotids);
murmur louder with
Valsalva and isometric
exercises; double or
triple apical impulse
displaced laterally;
holosystolic murmur
of mitral regurgitation
due to systolic anterior
motion of mitral leaflet;
S4; signs of congestive
heart failure (pulmonary
rales, lower extremity
edema, jugular
venous distention,
hepatomegaly)
»ECG: left axis
deviation; prominent Q
waves in inferior and
lateral leads
»echocardiography:
asymmetric septal
hypertrophy; systolic
anterior motion of
anterior mitral valve
leaflet; reversed E:A
ratio with diastolic
dysfunction; left atrial
enlargement.
»cardiac
catheterization:
increased left
ventricular outflow
tract gradient directly
related to severity of
obstruction; increased
left ventricle filling
pressures
Useful if
echocardiography is
insufficient.
◊ Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
often young age; may
be a family history
of heart disease or
sudden death; history
of palpitations, syncope
with exercise
in rare recessive form,
skin changes and
wooly hair; as disease
progresses: signs of
right or biventricular
heart failure
»ECG: epsilon waves,
T wave inversion,
localized QRS widening
»echocardiography:
dilated right ventricle
(RV), right ventricle
aneurysm
»cardiac MRI:
RV dilation, may
demonstrate RV fibrous
tissue (enhances in a
delayed fashion) and
RV fat
Cardiac MRI can
provide results which
are diagnostic for this
condition.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
»right ventricular
angiography:
focal wall motion
abnormality, aneurysm
◊ Mitral stenosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history rheumatic fever;
dyspnea on exertion;
orthopnea; palpitations;
hemoptysis;
hoarseness of voice
due to compression of
left recurrent laryngeal
nerve from left atrial
enlargement against
pulmonary artery
irregularly irregular
pulse if in atrial
fibrillation; loud S1;
murmur: low-pitched
diastolic rumble best
heard in expiration with
patient lying on left
side; opening snap;
loud P2 if pulmonary
hypertension present;
signs of congestive
heart failure (pulmonary
rales, lower extremity
edema, jugular
venous distention,
hepatomegaly)
»ECG: large p
waves (indicating left
atrial enlargement);
irregularly irregular
pulse, absent p waves
(if in atrial fibrillation)
»chest x-ray:
calcification of valve;
enlarged left atrium,
pulmonary edema
»echocardiography:
assesses valve area
and transvalvular
gradient (severity of
stenosis); left atrial
dilation
◊ Atrial myxoma
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
fever, weight loss,
dyspnea, palpitation,
orthopnea, paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea,
presyncope and
dizziness, symptoms of
embolization
jugular venous
distention with
prominent a wave; loud
S1; tumor plop in early
diastole
»ECG: large p waves
(indicating left atrial
enlargement)
»echocardiography:
visualization of mass;
left atrial hypertrophy
»transesophageal
echocardiography:
visualization of mass;
left atrial hypertrophy
Provides better
anatomic localization of
tumor.
»cardiac MRI:
visualization of mass
◊ Cardiac sarcoidosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
dizziness; palpitations;
shortness of breath;
signs for other organ
involvement with
»ECG: nonspecific, Q
waves, axis deviation,
»cardiac MRI:
myocardial late
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Cardiac sarcoidosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
fatigue; syncope or
presyncope; may have
known sarcoidosis
affecting other
organs[51]
sarcoidosis (e.g.,
audible rhonchi
on pulmonary
exam, nontender
lymphadenopathy,
red eyes, skin rash,
tenderness and
pain on joint exam,
hepatomegaly), as
disease progresses:
signs of heart failure
advanced conduction
blocks, complete heart
block, ventricular
arrhythmia, multifocal
and frequent premature
ventricular complexes
(PVCs)
»echocardiography:
regional abnormal wall
motion or thinning or
thickening, ventricular
aneurysm especially
localized thinning of
basal interventricular
septum[51]
»chest x-ray:
usually evidence of
associated pulmonary
sarcoid, hilar, and/
or paratracheal
adenopathy with upper
lobe predominant,
bilateral infiltrates
gadolinium
enhancement
(indicating macroscopic
interstitial fibrosis),
involvement of the
basal anterior septum
and inferior septum
with extension into
the right ventricle is
almost pathognomonic,
localized wall
thickening or thinning,
ventricular wall
aneurysms and wall
motion abnormality[51] 
»external cardiac
monitoring (e.g.,
Holter monitor)
or in-hospital
telemetry: advanced
conduction blocks,
complete heart block,
ventricular arrhythmia,
multifocal and frequent
PVCs
»implantable
cardiac monitor:
advanced conduction
blocks, complete heart
block, ventricular
arrhythmia, multifocal
and frequent PVCs
»electrophysiological
studies: advanced
conduction blocks,
inducible ventricular
arrhythmias
»18F-
fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) PET scan: a
mismatch of perfusion
defects and myocardial
inflammation is
characteristic[51]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
palpitations, fatigue;
risk factors include
digoxin toxicity,
substance misuse
and previous surgery
to correct congenital
cardiac defects
tachycardia; may
detect rales or edema if
congestive heart failure
is present
»ECG: regular
tachycardia that does
not vary in rate; P
waves may have an
unusual axis, such as
being inverted in the
inferior leads
◊ Subclavian steal syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
muscle cramping due
to ischemia with upper
extremity exercise,
often with arm above
the head; if arm
exercise exceeds the
capacity of collateral
blood, vertebrobasilar
insufficiency can result
in dizziness, vertigo,
diplopia, syncope, or
even dysarthria
difference in BP or
pulse measurements
in the 2 arms with
decreased brachial
artery pressure on the
affected side; induction
of symptoms with
exercise and bruit over
supraclavicular area
»duplex
ultrasonography:
retrograde blood flow in
the vertebral artery
◊ Implantable cardiac device malfunction
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of implantable
cardiac device
dysrhythmia
(tachycardia or
bradycardia)
»electrocardiogram:
may demonstrate lack
of capture, abnormal
rate
Ectopic pregnancy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
amenorrhea; known
pregnancy; previous
ectopic pregnancy;
prior tubal surgery;
pelvic inflammatory
disease; IUD usage;
abdominal pain; vaginal
bleeding
hypotensive;
tachycardia; abdominal
tenderness and
guarding; decreased
bowel sounds; cervical
motion tenderness;
vaginal bleeding
»urinary pregnancy
test: positive
»CBC: may be low Hb
»transvaginal
ultrasound:
visualization of ectopic
pregnancy; empty
uterus
»serum human
chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG):
positive
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Uncommon
Ectopic pregnancy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Absence of an
intrauterine gestational
sac at hCG
concentrations above
the serum hCG level
1500 or 2000 IU/L
strongly suggests an
ectopic pregnancy.
Hypoglycemia
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
gradual onset;
associated with
confusion, anxiety,
somnolence,
palpitations, lethargy;
medication history
including insulin or
sulfonylurea oral
hypoglycemic agents
diaphoretic, tachypnea,
tremor
»plasma glucose:
low; <50 mg/dL
»C-peptide level: high
in cases of insulinoma;
normal or low in cases
of exogenous insulin
administration
»sulfonylurea level:
positive in sulfonylurea-
induced hypoglycemia
Addison disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
life-threatening
crisis with syncope,
nausea, vomiting;
or insidious onset,
fatigue, weakness,
salt craving, dizziness;
history of autoimmune
disease such as type
1 diabetes, Hashimoto
thyroiditis, or systemic
lupus erythematosus
hypotension and/or
postural hypotension;
mucocutaneous
hyperpigmentation;
vitiligo
»electrolytes: low
sodium; elevated
potassium
»morning serum
cortisol: low; <3
micrograms/dL
»adrenocorticotropic
hormone
stimulation test: poor
response; cortisol <18
micrograms/dL
»CT abdomen: direct
visualization of adrenal
glands, may show
swelling or calcification
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Vertebrobasilar transient ischemic attack
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
syncope in association
with other symptoms
of brain stem ischemia
(i.e., diplopia, tinnitus,
vertigo, or dysarthria);
duration of symptoms
associated with
transient ischemic
attack (TIA) <24 hours
nystagmus, ataxia,
contralateral
impairment of pain
and temperature,
ipsilateral loss of taste
and numbness of
extremities, completely
resolved within 24
hours
»MRI: brainstem
infarction, normal in TIA
Advantage of early
diagnosis of ischemia
with diffusion-weighted
imaging.
»ECG: may show atrial
fibrillation; may be
normal
»carotid Doppler
ultrasonography:
vertebrobasilar stenosis
No studies have
suggested that routine
carotid Doppler
ultrasonography is
beneficial in patients
with syncope.[3] [26]
[53]
»CT head: brainstem
not well visualized; may
have chronic ischemic
changes
Not a sensitive test for
detecting brainstem
ischemia.
Commonly used
modality because of
widespread availability
and ease of detecting
hemorrhage.
»magnetic
resonance
angiography: stenosis
of vertebrobasilar artery
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of severe
headache, especially
with rapid onset
('thunderclap'); loss of
consciousness
altered mental status,
focal neurologic deficit
(although neurologic
exam may be normal),
neck pain/stiffness,
meningismus, cranial
nerve abnormalities
»CT imaging: initial
test is noncontrast brain
imaging, may show
collection of blood in
the subdural space[54]
»angiography: can
provide diagnostic
information and
concurrent therapeutic
intervention (coiling,
clipping)
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Evaluation of syncope Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Psychogenic pseudosyncope
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
generalized anxiety
disorder, panic disorder,
somatization disorder,
and major depression
can be associated
with psychogenic
pseudosyncope;
conversion disorder can
present with apparent
syncope; usually
young; no known
cardiac problems;
frequent episodes of
recurrent syncope,
longer duration of loss
of consciousness[15]
no specific exam
findings
»no initial test:
clinical diagnosis
»tilt table testing:
negative
Head-up tilt table used
to stand patient at 70°
for 45 minutes.
Patients with
somatization disorder
may develop a
"psychogenic"
response with
syncope or prodromal
symptoms.[55]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Evaluation of syncope References
REFERENCES
Key articles
• Shen WK, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the evaluation and
management of patients with syncope: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines, and the Heart Rhythm Society.
Circulation. 2017 Aug 1;136(5):e60-122.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/abs/10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000499)   Abstract
• Brignole M, Moya A, de Lange FJ, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
syncope. Eur Heart J. 2018 Jun 1;39(21):1883-948.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/
article/39/21/1883/4939241)   Abstract
• Antzelevitch C, Brugada P, Borggrefe M, et al. Brugada syndrome: report of the Second Consensus
Conference. Heart Rhythm. 2005 Apr;2(4):429-40. Abstract
• American College of Radiology. ACR appropriateness criteria: syncope. 2020 [internet publication]. 
Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3128014/Narrative)
References
1. Sun BC. Quality-of-life, health service use, and costs associated with syncope. Prog Cardiovasc
Dis. 2013 Jan-Feb;55(4):370-75.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0033062012001867?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23472773?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Probst MA, Su E, Weiss RE, et al. Clinical Benefit of Hospitalization for Older Adults With Unexplained
Syncope: A Propensity-Matched Analysis. Ann Emerg Med. 2019 Aug;74(2):260-69.  Full text
(https://www.annemergmed.com/article/S0196-0644(19)30250-1/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31080027?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Sarasin FP, Louis-Simonet M, Carballo D, et al. Prospective evaluation of patients with syncope: a
population-based study. Am J Med. 2001 Aug 15;111(3):177-84. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11530027?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. D'Ascenzo F, Biondi-Zoccai G, Reed MJ, et al. Incidence, etiology and predictors of adverse
outcomes in 43,315 patients presenting to the emergency department with syncope: an international
meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Jul 15;167(1):57-62. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22192287?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Sun BC, Hoffman JR, Mangione CM, et al. Older age predicts short-term, serious
events after syncope. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007 Jun;55(6):907-12.  Full text (https://
agsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01188.x)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17537092?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. Grossman SA, Chiu D, Lipsitz L, et al. Can elderly patients without risk factors be discharged
home when presenting to the emergency department with syncope? Arch Gerontol Geriatr.
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Evaluation of syncope References
2014 Jan-Feb;58(1):110-14.  Full text (hhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0167494313001179?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23993263?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Gibson TA, Weiss RE, Sun BC. Predictors of Short-Term Outcomes after Syncope: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. West J Emerg Med. 2018 May;19(3):517-23.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5942019)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29760850?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Grubb BP, Karabin B. Syncope: evaluation and management in the geriatric patient. Clin
Geriatr Med. 2012 Nov;28(4):717-28.  Full text (hhttps://www.geriatric.theclinics.com/article/
S0749-0690(12)00070-5/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23101580?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Shen WK, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the evaluation
and management of patients with syncope: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines, and the Heart Rhythm
Society. Circulation. 2017 Aug 1;136(5):e60-122.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/
abs/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28280231?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Heart valve disease presenting in adults:
investigation and management. Nov 2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ng208)
11. Brignole M, Moya A, de Lange FJ, et al. 2018 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management
of syncope. Eur Heart J. 2018 Jun 1;39(21):1883-948.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/39/21/1883/4939241)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29562304?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Wang CZ. Current diagnosis and management of children with vasovagal syncope. World J Pediatr.
2007;3:98-103.
13. Mckee AC, Daneshvar DH. The neuropathology of traumatic brain injury. Handb Clin Neurol.
2015;127:45-66.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444528926000040?
via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25702209?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Wiener Z, Shapiro NI, Chiu DT, et al. The prevalence of psychiatric disease in emergency department
patients with unexplained syncope. Intern Emerg Med. 2013 Aug;8(5):427-30.  Full text (https://
link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11739-013-0946-6)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23645509?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Alciati A, Shiffer D, Dipaola F, et al. Psychogenic Pseudosyncope: Clinical Features, Diagnosis and
Management. J Atr Fibrillation. 2020 Jun-Jul;13(1):2399.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC7533137)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33024500?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Evaluation of syncope References
REFERENCES
16. Arnar DO. Syncope in patients with structural heart disease. J Intern Med. 2013 Apr;273(4):336-44. 
Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/joim.12027)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23510364?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Rushworth RL, Torpy DJ, Falhammar H. Adrenal Crisis. N Engl J Med. 2019 Aug
29;381(9):852-61.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMra1807486?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31461595?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Calvo-Romero JM, Pérez-Miranda M, Bureo-Dacal P. Syncope in acute pulmonary embolism. Eur
J Emerg Med. 2004 Aug;11(4):208-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15249807?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Prandoni P, Lensing AW, Prins MH, et al. Prevalence of Pulmonary
Embolism among Patients Hospitalized for Syncope. N Engl J Med. 2016 Oct
20;375(16):1524-31.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1602172?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27797317?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Timmons S, Kingston M, Hussain M, et al. Pulmonary embolism: differences in presentation
between older and younger patients. Age Ageing. 2003 Nov;32(6):601-5.  Full text (http://
ageing.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/32/6/601)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/14600000?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Konstantinides SV, Meyer G, Becattini C, et al. 2019 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of acute pulmonary embolism developed in collaboration with the European
Respiratory Society (ERS): The Task Force for the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary
embolism of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Respir J. 2019 Sep;54(3).  Full text
(https://erj.ersjournals.com/content/54/3/1901647.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31473594?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Brignole M, Moya A, de Lange FJ, et al. Practical Instructions for the 2018 ESC Guidelines for the
diagnosis and management of syncope. Eur Heart J. 2018 Jun 1;39(21):e43-e80.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/39/21/e43/4939242)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29562291?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Wieling W, Ganzeboom KS, Krediet CT, et al. Initial diagnostic strategy in the case of transient
losses of consciousness: the importance of the medical history [in Dutch]. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd.
2003 May 3;147(18):849-54. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12756875?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Sheldon R, Rose S, Ritchie D, et al. Historical criteria that distinguish syncope from seizures. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2002 Jul 3;40(1):142-8.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S073510970201940X?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12103268?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Asplund CA, O'Connor FG, Noakes TD. Exercise-associated collapse: an evidence-based
review and primer for clinicians. Br J Sports Med. 2011 Nov;45(14):1157-62.  Full text (http://
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Evaluation of syncope References
bjsm.bmj.com/content/45/14/1157.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21948122?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Alboni P, Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al. Diagnostic value of history in patients with syncope
with or without heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001 Jun 1;37(7):1921-8.  Full text (https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109701012414?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11401133?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Brigo F, Nardone R, Bongiovanni LG. Value of tongue biting in the differential diagnosis between
epileptic seizures and syncope. Seizure. 2012 Oct;21(8):568-72.  Full text (https://www.seizure-
journal.com/article/S1059-1311(12)00151-3/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22770819?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Middlekauff HR, Stevenson WG, Stevenson LW, et al. Syncope in advanced heart failure: high risk
of sudden death regardless of origin of syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993 Jan;21(1):110-6.  Full text
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/073510979390724F?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8417050?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Le RJ, Fenstad ER, Maradit-Kremers H, et al. Syncope in adults with pulmonary arterial
hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011 Aug 16;58(8):863-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21835323?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Antzelevitch C, Brugada P, Borggrefe M, et al. Brugada syndrome: report of the Second Consensus
Conference. Heart Rhythm. 2005 Apr;2(4):429-40. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15898165?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Brugada J, Brugada R, Antzelevitch C, et al. Long-term follow-up of individuals with the
electrocardiographic pattern of right bundle-branch block and ST-segment elevation in precordial
leads V1 to V3. Circulation. 2002 Jan 1;105(1):73-8.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/hc0102.101354)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11772879?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Spirito P, Autore C, Rapezzi C, et al. Syncope and risk of sudden death in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Circulation. 2009 Apr 7;119(13):1703-10.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.798314)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19307481?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Iglesias JF, Graf D, Forclaz A, et al. Stepwise evaluation of unexplained syncope in a large
ambulatory population. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2009 Mar;32 (Suppl 1):S202-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19250095?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, et al. Consensus statement on the definition of orthostatic
hypotension, neurally mediated syncope and the postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Auton Res. 2011
Apr;21(2):69-72. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21431947?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Dovgalyuk J, Holstege C, Mattu A, et al. The electrocardiogram in the patient with syncope. Am J
Emerg Med. 2007 Jul;25(6):688-701. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17606095?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Evaluation of syncope References
REFERENCES
36. Costantino G, Sun BC, Barbic F, et al. Syncope clinical management in the emergency department:
a consensus from the first international workshop on syncope risk stratification in the emergency
department. Eur Heart J. 2016 May 14;37(19):1493-8.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/37/19/1493/1748716)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26242712?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Grossman SA, Fischer C, Lipsitz LA, et al. Predicting adverse outcomes in syncope. J Emerg Med.
2007 Oct;33(3):233-9.  Full text (https://www.jem-journal.com/article/S0736-4679(07)00297-1/fulltext)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17976548?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Bastani A, Su E, Adler DH, et al. Comparison of 30-Day Serious Adverse Clinical Events for
Elderly Patients Presenting to the Emergency Department With Near-Syncope Versus Syncope.
Ann Emerg Med. 2019 Mar;73(3):274-80.  Full text (https://www.annemergmed.com/article/
S0196-0644(18)31420-3/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30529112?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Quinn JV, Stiell IG, McDermott DA, et al. Derivation of the San Francisco Syncope Rule to predict
patients with short-term serious outcomes. Ann Emerg Med. 2004 Feb;43(2):224-32. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14747812?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Rex DK, Boland CR, Dominitz JA, et al. Colorectal cancer screening: recommendations for
physicians and patients from the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on colorectal cancer. Am J
Gastroenterol. 2017 Jul;112(7):1016-30.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/ajg/fulltext/2017/07000/
colorectal_cancer_screening__recommendations_for.13.aspx)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28555630?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Suspected cancer: recognition and referral. Oct
2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng12)
42. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Quantitative faecal immunochemical testing to guide
colorectal cancer pathway referral in primary care. Aug 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/dg56)
43. American College of Radiology. ACR appropriateness criteria: syncope. 2020 [internet publication]. 
Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3128014/Narrative)
44. Huff JS, Decker WW, Quinn JV, et al. Clinical policy: critical issues in the evaluation and
management of adult patients presenting to the emergency department with syncope. Ann
Emerg Med. 2007 Apr;49(4):431-44. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17371707?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Ghani AR, Ullah W, Abdullah HMA, et al. The role of echocardiography in diagnostic evaluation of
patients with syncope-a retrospective analysis. Am J Cardiovasc Dis. 2019;9(5):78-83.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6872465)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31763059?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Primary Writing Committee., Sandhu RK, Raj SR, et al. Canadian Cardiovascular Society
Clinical Practice Update on the Assessment and Management of Syncope. Can J Cardiol. 2020
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Evaluation of syncope References
Aug;36(8):1167-1177.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.cjca.2019.12.023)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32624296?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management
of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022 May 3;145(18):e895-1032. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001063)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35363499?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Nader A, Massumi A, Cheng J, et al. Inherited arrhythmic disorders: long QT and Brugada syndromes.
Tex Heart Inst J. 2007;34(1):67-75.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1847921) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17420796?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Antzelevitch C, Brugada P, Brugada J, et al. Brugada syndrome: 1992-2002: a historical perspective.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 May 21;41(10):1665-71.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0735109703003103?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12767644?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Moss AJ. Long QT syndrome. JAMA. 2003 Apr 23-30;289(16):2041-4. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12709446?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Kouranos V, Sharma R. Cardiac sarcoidosis: state-of-the-art review. Heart. 2021 Mar 4 [Epub ahead of
print].  Full text (https://heart.bmj.com/content/early/2021/03/03/heartjnl-2019-316442.long)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33674355?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Grobbee EJ, Wisse PHA, Schreuders EH, et al. Guaiac-based faecal occult blood tests versus
faecal immunochemical tests for colorectal cancer screening in average-risk individuals. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2022 Jun 6;6(6):CD009276.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC9169237)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35665911?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Ammirati F, Colivicchi F, Santini M. Diagnosing syncope in clinical practice. Implementation of a
simplified diagnostic algorithm in a multicentre prospective trial - the OESIL 2 study (Osservatorio
Epidemiologico della Sincope nel Lazio). Eur Heart J. 2000 Jun;21(11):935-40.  Full text (http://
eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/21/11/935)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10806018?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Grossman SA, Fischer C, Bar JL, et al. The yield of head CT in syncope: a pilot study. Intern Emerg
Med. 2007 Mar;2(1):46-9.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2780634)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17551685?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Grubb BP, Gerard G, Wolfe DA, et al. Syncope and seizures of psychogenic origin: identification
with head-upright tilt table testing. Clin Cardiol. 1992 Nov;15(11):839-42.  Full text (https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1002/clc.4960151109)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10969628?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Evaluation of syncope Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Evaluation of syncope Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 05, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Shamai Grossman, MD, MS
Associate Professor of Medicine and Emergency Medicine
Harvard Medical School Department, Vice Chair for Health Care Quality, Director, Observation Medicine,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA
DISCLOSURES: SG is an author of a reference cited in this topic.
Christopher Fischer, MD
Chair, Assistant Professor
Mount Auburn Hospital,, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
DISCLOSURES: CF is an author of a reference cited in this topic.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Shamai Grossman and Dr Christopher Fischer would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Sanjeev Wasson,
Dr Sarabjeet Singh and Dr Nishant Kalra, the previous contributors to this topic. SS and NK declare that
they have no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
David Leaf, MD, MPH
Professor of Medicine
VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA
DISCLOSURES: DL declares that he has no competing interests.
Sanjiv Petkar, MBBS, MD, DM (Cardiology), MRCP
Consultant Cardiologist
Heart and Lung Centre, New Cross Hospital, Wolverhampton, UK
DISCLOSURES: SP has received funds for attending conferences, and fees for speaking and consultation,
from Medtronic Inc. SP was also in receipt of funding for research, between 2007 and 2009, from Medtronic
Inc. to the University of Manchester. SP was a Guideline Development Group member of the National
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (formerly National Institute for Clinical Excellence) guidelines on
transient loss of consciousness ('blackouts') management in adults and young people, published in August
2010.
Nicholas Gall, MSc, MD, FRCP
Consultant Cardiologist
Department of Cardiology, King's College Hospital, London, UK
DISCLOSURES: NG declares that he has no competing interests.
