# Evaluation of peripheral edema

=== Page 1 ===
Evaluation of
peripheral edema
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Dec 31, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Theory  4
Etiology  4
Emergencies  6
Urgent considerations  6
Diagnosis  10
Approach  10
Differentials overview  16
Differentials  18
Evidence tables  44
References  48
Images  55
Disclaimer  60
=== Page 3 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Overview
Summary
Peripheral edema is the presence of excess interstitial fluid in the tissue of the extremities, which causes
palpable swelling.[1]
Edema develops when microvascular filtration, and therefore interstitial fluid production, exceeds lymph
drainage for a sustained period. This could be because the microvascular filtration rate is high, lymph flow is
low, or both.[2]
Development of edema: an imbalance between the filtration of
fluid from the bloodstream and drainage via the lymph system.
Created by BMJ Knowledge Centre
The body has a number of homeostatic mechanisms that serve to maintain interstitial fluid balance, and
these must be overwhelmed before fluid buildup becomes evident as peripheral edema. Clues generated
by the history, physical examination, and targeted evaluation help to identify the factors affecting lymphatic
drainage and microvascular filtration. In many patients, multiple factors contribute to the development of
peripheral edema.
Lymphedema is predominantly caused by inadequate lymphatic drainage.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Theory
THEORY
Etiology
A variety of disease states or medications can cause peripheral edema by altering the mechanisms that
maintain the normal volume of interstitial fluid. In many cases, the edema may be multifactorial, with various
contributing factors.
Interstitial fluid and the extracellular matrix (comprised of structural and connective molecules such as
collagen fibers and glycosaminoglycans) form the interstitial space. This space exists outside the blood
vessels, lymphatic vessels, and parenchymal cells. Interstitial fluid is formed from an ultrafiltrate of blood.
It transports nutrients and waste products between cells and capillaries, delivers antigens and cytokines to
draining lymph nodes, and transports intercellular signaling molecules.[3]
Interstitial fluid is initially drained through noncontractile terminal lymphatic channels, which are present in
nearly all tissues. These terminal lymphatic channels deliver lymph to larger collecting lymphatic channels,
which are surrounded by smooth muscle and contain valves to assist unidirectional flow. From there, lymph
flows through lymph nodes, then passes through progressively larger lymphatic channels and finally enters
the central venous circulation.[3]
Several physiologic mechanisms regulate the volume of interstitial fluid production and lymphatic drainage.
When one or more of these mechanisms is overwhelmed, edema develops.
Chronic edema is a common problem in hospitalized patients. One study, enrolling hospitalized patients
from Denmark, France, Australia, the United Kingdom and Ireland, reported chronic edema prevalence of
38%.[4] The risk factors associated with presence of chronic edema were age, morbid obesity, heart failure,
immobility, and neurologic deficiency.[4]
Increased microvascular filtration
Microvascular filtration occurs in the venules and capillaries. Filtration rate depends on the hydrostatic
pressure in the vessel, which drives fluid out of the vessel into the interstitial space, and the colloid osmotic
pressure in the vessel, which promotes retention of fluid in the vessel. Microvascular filtration may increase
when hydrostatic pressure increases and/or colloid osmotic pressure decreases.
Increased hydrostatic pressure occurs when systemic venous pressure increases: for example, in heart
failure, cor pulmonale, venous insufficiency (e.g., due to a failure in calf muscle pump action), venous
obstruction (e.g., by pelvic tumor or venous thrombosis). Premenstrual edema occurs when hormonally-
mediated renal salt and water retention increases total body fluid.
Following a deep vein thrombosis in the leg, up to 50% of patients develop postthrombotic syndrome with
symptoms and signs of chronic venous insufficiency.[5] The pathophysiology is incompletely understood;
venous hypertension probably results from several mechanisms including residual venous obstruction and
valvular reflux. Ultimately, microvascular permeability increases and interstitial fluid accumulates locally.[5]
Pregnancy is commonly associated with lower-extremity edema starting in the second trimester. This is due
to increased total body fluid as a result of neurohormonal changes and to mechanical pressure on the inferior
vena cava from the gravid uterus.[6]
Drugs that cause renal fluid and salt retention, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, may precipitate
peripheral edema.[7] [8]
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Theory
Nephrotic syndrome, cirrhosis, kwashiorkor, and protein-losing enteropathies all cause reduced serum colloid
osmotic pressure.[6]
When blood vessel walls become more permeable in response to the actions of cytokines, prostaglandins,
or nitric oxide, large serum proteins move into the interstitial space. This reduces the colloid osmotic gradient
and increases the rate of interstitial fluid production.[6] [9] Patients who have sepsis have increased vascular
permeability as a result of circulating cytokines and frequently develop extensive peripheral edema.[9]
This mechanism also plays a role in the edema seen in hypothyroid myxedema, angioedema, and allergic
reactions.[6]
In some disease states, the pathophysiology of increased microvascular filtration is multifactorial.
For example, cirrhosis causes fluid retention, and therefore raised venous pressure, by a number of
complementary mechanisms: splanchnic vasodilation reduces effective renal perfusion, inducing sodium
and water retention; serum colloid osmotic pressure declines as a result of synthetic liver dysfunction; and
altered architecture of the hepatic sinusoids results in mechanical congestion with venous hypertension and
increased hydrostatic gradient in the abdomen and lower extremities.[6] [10] [11]
Patients who have a normal lymphatic system that is overwhelmed by excess interstitial fluid production will
develop edema. Over time, this can cause permanent structural damage to the lymphatic vessels, so that
even if microvascular filtration returns to normal, peripheral edema persists because lymphatic drainage is
impaired.
Decreased lymphatic drainage
The lymphatic system drains fluid from the interstitial space and ultimately returns it to the venous circulation.
Approximately 80% of lymphatic drainage must be nonfunctional before lymphedema (caused by inadequate
lymphatic drainage) becomes clinically evident.[12] Lymphatic stasis leads to fat hypertrophy, with associated
thickening of subcutaneous tissue, and immunologic dysfunction. Elevated concentrations of interstitial
protein cause inflammation and fibrosis, leading to further damage.[12]
Lymphedema may be primary (caused by hypoplastic lymph vessel development) or secondary.[13] Primary
lymphedema accounts for approximately 1% of cases.[12] Secondary causes include:
• Surgical removal or irradiation of lymph nodes. Approximately 20% of patients with breast cancer who
undergo axillary lymph node dissection and 5% who undergo sentinel lymph node biopsy develop arm
lymphedema.[14]
• Neoplastic infiltration of lymph nodes
• Trauma
• Parasitic nematode infections (e.g., filariasis)
• Some medications (e.g., calcium-channel blockers)
• Reduced mobility.
Movement and exercise generate movement of interstitial fluid into the initial lymphatics, so when a patient
has impaired mobility, lymph drainage often decreases.[15] [16]
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
Urgent considerations
(See  Differentials  for more details)
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Acute-onset, asymmetric, tender leg edema (with associated swelling and redness) may be a sign of new
DVT, which can be a threat to life if it embolizes to the lung.[17] Patients may also report localized pain over
the deep venous system or dilated superficial veins over the foot and leg.
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) of the right leg with associated swelling and redness
From the collection of James Heilman, MD.
Massive venous thrombosis can be associated with a limb-threatening syndrome referred to as phlegmasia
cerulea dolens, in which the venous congestion leads to such a degree of interstitial edema that
compartment syndrome, arterial compromise, and gangrene can occur.[18]
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Emergencies
For patients with a high pretest probability of DVT, determined by Wells clinical prediction rules, duplex
ultrasound is the first-line test in most instances, particularly if a thrombosis in the popliteal, superficial
femoral, or common femoral veins is suspected. If the pretest probability is low, a negative D-dimer test
allows ultrasound to be safely excluded.[17] [19] 
In the absence of contraindications, therapeutic anticoagulation should be initiated immediately on
diagnosis.[17] [19] Further treatment, such as thrombolysis, thrombectomy, and/or fasciotomy, may be
necessary for massive thrombosis.[19] [20]
Heart failure
Acute-onset heart failure, which may present with dyspnea and lower-extremity edema (usually bilateral),
requires urgent evaluation to establish the underlying etiology of the cardiac dysfunction.[21]
Emergency diagnoses such as myocardial ischemia, pericardial effusion with cardiac tamponade,
constrictive pericarditis, valvular disease, or cardiomyopathy should be considered when new symptoms of
heart failure develop rapidly.[22] Complaints of chest pain, shortness of breath, orthopnea, or paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea may provide a clue that the peripheral edema arises from an acute cardiac cause.
Evidence of pulmonary edema, elevated jugular venous pressure, heart murmurs, pericardial friction rubs,
or pulsus paradoxus further support a cardiac etiology of the edema. ECG, chest x-ray, cardiac troponins, B-
type natriuretic peptide/N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide, and echocardiography would be appropriate
to evaluate for suspected acute cardiac disease when peripheral edema is a component of the presenting
syndrome.[23] [24]
Exacerbation of preexisting chronic heart failure is noticed by the patient as fluid retention and increased
lower-extremity edema.[22] A cause for the decompensation should be sought. Worsening of symptoms of
edema from known heart failure requires treatment to regain euvolemia, usually loop diuretics, and institution
of other measures to improve and preserve cardiac function.[22] [25] Pericardial effusions with tamponade
require pericardiocentesis.[26]
New-onset renal disease
Frequently, the presenting symptom of nephrotic syndrome is peripheral edema, which starts in the legs
and may become severe involving the entire body (anasarca), and periorbital edema.[27] Patients may also
report frothy urine. Initial investigations should include testing for proteinuria, serum creatinine and serum
albumin. Severe protein-wasting renal disease or acute renal failure with volume overload requires early
nephrology evaluation.
Myxedema coma
Peripheral edema is one of the features seen with profound hypothyroidism, an endocrinologic
emergency.[28] In this setting, edema would not occur in isolation but rather as part of a multisystem
disorder. Other signs or symptoms may include mental status changes, lethargy, constipation, weight gain,
coarse hair, dry skin, and cold intolerance.[29] Treatment requires intravenous thyroid hormone replacement.
Acute hepatic venous obstruction
Venous obstruction at the level of the liver (including Budd-Chiari syndrome and hepatic veno-occlusive
disease) can cause peripheral edema, typically in association with abdominal pain, hepatomegaly, and
ascites.[30] While obstruction can be caused by a variety of pathologic processes, thrombus formation would
EMERGENCIES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
be associated with rapid onset of symptoms. The combination of peripheral edema, hepatomegaly, ascites,
and abdominal pain, along with elevated transaminases and possibly jaundice, should prompt evaluation of
the blood flow through the liver with imaging such as duplex ultrasound. Computed tomography or magnetic
resonance imaging can also be used. A similar picture of hepatic congestion can be seen with cardiac
disease, and this should be maintained in the differential diagnosis for this presentation. 
Compartment syndrome
Compartment syndrome can rapidly threaten the viability of a limb, and should be investigated and managed
aggressively when suspected. Typical clinical scenarios include trauma to the extremity due to fractures, soft-
tissue injury, vascular compromise, and burn injuries.
Features that might alert the clinician to this diagnosis include unilateral edema, severe pain in the extremity
especially on passive stretch of the muscle, a compartment tense to palpation, muscle weakness, and
hypoesthesia. Where applicable, casts or occlusive dressings should be removed and any padding or
circumferential dressings should be released immediately.
Measurement of compartment pressure is indicated whenever the diagnosis is uncertain in a patient at risk.
The perfusion pressure of a compartment (the compartment delta pressure) is defined as the difference
between the diastolic BP and the intra-compartmental pressure (i.e., diastolic BP minus compartment
pressure). A delta pressure of ≤30 mmHg is considered a strong indicator for fasciotomy.[31] [32] [33]
However, care should be taken when using this criterion in patients who are receiving vasodilatory
medications and whose diastolic BP is low.
Sepsis
Peripheral edema itself is not a typical presenting symptom for sepsis, unless the underlying cause is a focal
infection in the limb.
In patients with sepsis, edema may occur several days after the administration of large volume fluid
resuscitation. Nevertheless, it is important to consider the possibility of sepsis in any patient with edema who
presents with possible signs of infection.[34]
Sepsis is a spectrum of disease, where there is a systemic and dysregulated host response to an
infection.[35] Presentation ranges from subtle, nonspecific symptoms (e.g., feeling unwell with a normal
temperature, malaise, lethargy, nausea, or vomiting) to severe symptoms with evidence of multiorgan
dysfunction and septic shock. Patients may have signs of tachycardia, tachypnea, hypotension, fever or
hypothermia, poor capillary refill, mottled or ashen skin, cyanosis, newly altered mental state or reduced
urine output.[34] Sepsis and septic shock are medical emergencies.
Risk factors for sepsis include:[34]
• Age under 1 year
• Age over 75 years
• Frailty, impaired immunity (due to illness or drugs)
• Recent surgery or other invasive procedures
• Any breach of skin integrity (e.g., cuts, burns)
• Intravenous drug misuse
• Indwelling lines or catheters, and
• Pregnancy or recent pregnancy
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Emergencies
Early recognition of sepsis is essential because early treatment improves outcomes.[34] [36] [Evidence
C] [Evidence C] However, detection can be challenging because the clinical presentation of sepsis can
be subtle and nonspecific. A low threshold for suspecting sepsis is therefore important. The key to early
recognition is the systematic identification of any patient who has signs or symptoms suggestive of
infection and is at risk of deterioration due to organ dysfunction. Several risk stratification approaches
have been proposed. All rely on a structured clinical assessment and recording of the patient’s vital
signs.[34] [37] [38][39] [40] It is important to check local guidance for information on which approach your
institution recommends. The timeline of ensuing investigations and treatment should be guided by this early
assessment.[39]
Treatment guidelines have been produced by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign and remain the most widely
accepted standards.[36] [41] 
Recommended treatment of patients with suspected sepsis is:
• Measure lactate level, and remeasure lactate if initial lactate is elevated (>18 mg/dL [>2 mmol/L]).
• Obtain blood cultures before administering antibiotics.
• Administer broad-spectrum antibiotics (with methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  [MRSA]
coverage if there is high risk of MRSA) for adults with possible septic shock or a high likelihood for
sepsis.
• For adults with sepsis or septic shock at high risk of fungal infection, empiric antifungal therapy should
be administered.
• Begin rapid administration of crystalloid fluids for hypotension or lactate level ≥36 mg/dL (≥4 mmol/L).
Consult local protocols.
• Administer vasopressors peripherally if hypotensive during or after fluid resuscitation to maintain MAP
≥65 mmHg, rather than delaying initiation until central venous access is secured. Norepinephrine
(noradrenaline) is the vasopressor of choice.
• For adults with sepsis-induced hypoxemic respiratory failure, high flow nasal oxygen should be given.
Ideally these interventions should all begin in the first hour after sepsis recognition.[41]
For adults with possible sepsis without shock, if concern for infection persists, antibiotics should be given
within three hours from the time when sepsis was first recognized.[36]
For adults with a low likelihood of infection and without shock, antibiotics can be deferred while continuing to
closely monitor the patient.[36]
See Sepsis in adults  and Sepsis in children .
EMERGENCIES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Approach
Peripheral edema is a physical examination finding. As such, the only diagnostic test to establish the
presence of edema is examination and palpation of the extremities. Diagnosing the underlying cause of the
edema is the goal of the investigative evaluation.
History
• Patients report swelling and a tense sensation in the extremities, usually worse the longer the
extremity remains dependent (subject to the influence of gravity). Edema may accumulate around the
thighs, buttocks and sacrum in nonambulatory patients.
• The affected limb often feels heavy or weak.
• Patients may describe feeling as though clothing or jewelry no longer fit, or may indicate changes in
total weight. If fluid retention is systemic, body weight may increase by as much as 10% before pitting
edema is evident.[42]
• It is helpful to clarify whether the edema resolves with elevation: for example, whether ankle edema
resolves overnight. Edema that resolves is more likely to represent an excess of interstitial fluid
production, whereas edema that does not improve significantly indicates a probable lymph drainage
problem. Swelling in lymphedema starts in the distal extremities and migrates proximally.
Speed of onset
• Determines whether the peripheral edema is acute or chronic.
Associated symptoms
• Calf pain, redness, localized pain over the deep venous system, dilated superficial veins over the foot
and leg and unilateral edema may be signs of deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
• Presence of back pain or weight loss may indicate pelvic malignancy causing lower-extremity venous
congestion.
In taking the history, it is important to elicit associated symptoms of systemic cardiac, pulmonary, hepatic,
renal, or endocrinologic disease to guide further testing.
• Cardiac: dyspnea, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea may indicate heart failure; dizziness,
palpitations, chest pain.
• Pulmonary: shortness of breath and chest pain may occur in pulmonary embolism.
• Hepatic: abdominal bloating from ascites, abdominal discomfort from hepatic congestion.
• Renal: frothy urine may occur in nephrotic syndrome (due to increased protein content); changes in
urine output or color.
• Endocrinologic: fatigue, cold intolerance, dry skin, constipation, weight gain, and coarse hair can
indicate hypothyroidism; a cyclic pattern of edema may indicate premenstrual edema.
Past medical history
• Recent history is important, especially a history of trauma, surgery, or prolonged immobility, which
would increase the likelihood of venous thrombosis.
• Pregnancy is associated with lower limb edema, starting in the second trimester.
• History of venous thrombosis predisposes to chronic venous insufficiency.
• Previous malignancy, radiation, surgery, or infection can cause secondary lymphedema.[13]
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
• Penetrating trauma to the groin or axilla may cause secondary lymphedema.
Drug history
• Close temporal association of the onset of edema with the initiation of medications such as
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, calcium-channel blockers, thiazolidinediones, corticosteroids,
gabapentin, pregabalin, oral contraceptives containing estrogen, chemotherapy agents, or levodopa
would support a medication-induced etiology.[8] [43] [44]
• ACE inhibitors may trigger angioedema.
Social history
• Activities of daily living may help to identify other causes of edema, and reveal the impact of the
edema on quality of life. Inquire about sleeping habits (whether in bed or in a chair), and use of
walking or other ambulatory aids.
Family history
• May suggest a primary lymphedema.
Travel history
• Elicit whether the patient has visited areas where filariasis is endemic.
Physical examination
The degree of edema is commonly described on a 0 to 4+ scale in order of increasing severity.[42] One
clinical assessment method uses the following scoring system:[45]
A clinical assessment scoring system
Created by BMJ Knowledge Centre based on Brodovicz KG, McNaughton K, Uemura N, et al. Reliability
and feasibility of methods to quantitatively assess peripheral edema. Clin Med Res. 2009 Jun;7(1-2):21-31.
Describing the level that edema extends to proximally on the limbs is also useful in communicating the
severity of peripheral edema. However, these descriptions are inexact and may fluctuate depending on the
patient's positioning.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Ankle circumference is a simple quantitative test for clinical practice with good inter-rater reliability. It is
measured 7 cm proximal to the medial malleolus.[45]
Stemmer sign is present if the examiner cannot pinch a fold of skin at the base of the patient's second toe. It
is a sensitive test for primary and secondary lymphedema.[46] Lymphedema is pitting in the early stages and
becomes nonpitting due to adipose deposition and fibrosis when the lymphedema is chronic and advanced.
A key discriminating factor in narrowing etiologies is whether the edema is limited to a single extremity or is
generalized. Generalized edema suggests a systemic illness such as heart failure, cirrhosis, or nephrotic
syndrome. Localized edema suggests a localized venous or lymphatic abnormality.
Comprehensive physical examination is crucial, with particular focus on the cardiac and pulmonary systems.
Examination findings that might indicate an underlying cause for peripheral edema include:
• Cardiovascular: additional S3 or S4 heart sounds, gallop rhythm, raised jugular venous pressure
in heart failure; pulsus paradoxus, pericardial friction rub, muffled heart sounds, and elevated
jugular venous pressure in pericardial disease; Kussmaul sign (rise in jugular venous pressure
on inspiration), S3 heart sound, mitral regurgitation murmur, elevated jugular venous pressure in
restrictive cardiomyopathy; systolic murmur at the left lower sternal border and prominent ventricular
impulse in the left parasternal region in tricuspid regurgitation.
• Respiratory: rales if there is pulmonary edema, wheeze in cor pulmonale caused by COPD.
• Abdominal: splenomegaly, ascites, jaundice, spider nevi, and enlarged periumbilical veins (caput
medusae) in cirrhosis; tender hepatomegaly in Budd-Chiari syndrome, hepatomegaly and ascites in
heart failure, restrictive cardiomyopathy or tricuspid regurgitation; palpable mass in lower abdomen
may indicate tumor causing external pressure on pelvic veins.
• Dermatologic: presence of varicose veins, fibrosis, ulcers, or skin changes (such as hemosiderin
staining, atrophie blanche, and venous stasis dermatitis) suggests a chronic venous insufficiency.
Lymphatic insufficiency often coexists with venous insufficiency. Calf asymmetry, warmth, tenderness,
and erythema, dilated superficial veins and/or palpable cords behind the leg, occur in DVT. Periorbital
edema is characteristic of nephrotic syndrome. Dry skin and coarse hair occur in myxedema.
• Musculoskeletal: severe pain on passive stretch in compartment syndrome, disproportionate to the
injury severity. In compartment syndrome, pulse exam may be normal, and unless an artery is injured,
the capillaries refill. Impaired calf muscle pump function; may be associated with ankle foot orthoses or
drop foot.
• General: tachypnea, tachycardia, altered mental status, hypotension, decreased urine output, diarrhea,
warm flushed or cold clammy skin in sepsis. Obesity, large tonsils, short neck with large circumference
suggest obstructive sleep apnea.
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Atrophie blanche and hemosiderin deposition in a patient with chronic venous insufficiency
From the collection of Dr Joseph L. Mills; used with permission
Diagnostic testing
The underlying etiology of edema can be suggested by basic screening tests.[6] [47]
Serum chemistry, hepatic function panel, serum protein, albumin, and urinalysis are indicated. Thyroid-
stimulating hormone levels, cardiac troponins, B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)/N-terminal pro-B-type
natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), ECG, chest x-ray and/or echocardiography may be useful when some
features of history or physical exam suggest endocrine or cardiopulmonary disease.
Evaluation of lymphatic drainage with lymphoscintigraphy may be considered when clinical assessment
and investigations have excluded systemic and local vascular factors as a cause of peripheral edema.
Lymphoscintigraphy is rarely used in the routine investigation of peripheral edema.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Approach to the patient with peripheral edema. DVT, deep vein thrombosis; HTN, hypertension
Created by Ethan Cumbler, MD
Asymmetric edema
For patients with asymmetric peripheral edema and no apparent cause (such as radiation or surgical lymph
node dissection), testing should focus on proximal venous or lymphatic obstruction.
A duplex ultrasound of the inferior vena cava or iliac vessels should be considered if a proximal cause is
suspected, and can identify venous insufficiency, venous thrombosis, or nonthrombotic iliac vein lesions
(e.g., May-Thurner syndrome [compression of the left common iliac vein by the overlying right common iliac
artery]).
Ultrasound may identify hypoechoic regions superficial to the mid calf muscles if a popliteal fossa cyst has
ruptured. Pelvic ultrasound may reveal presence of a mass causing preferential compression of venous flow
from one lower extremity.
Computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging may be considered if pelvic or abdominal disease is
suspected.
If history arouses suspicion of filariasis then blood smears for detection of microfilariae are indicated.
Genetic testing may be ordered in patients with primary lymphedema, although familial/syndromic causes are
rare.[48] [49] [50]
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Bilateral edema
For patients with diffuse or bilateral edema, the initial diagnostic focus is on determining whether an organ
system is in dysfunction.
Serum protein and albumin can screen for the etiologies that cause hypoproteinemia, such as nephrotic
syndrome, protein-losing enteropathies, or profound malnutrition. Low protein is also a feature of cirrhosis. If
low serum albumin is detected, urinalysis and serum creatinine are ordered to determine if the cause is renal
protein wasting, while liver function tests and coagulation studies are ordered to assess hepatic synthetic
dysfunction.
Normal urine and hepatic testing suggests malnutrition or protein-losing enteropathy as the cause of
hypoproteinemia. The history should distinguish between these two clinical entities.
Serum chemistry, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine should be ordered if there is suspicion of renal failure,
heart failure, or cirrhosis. Elevated creatinine and reduced glomerular filtration rate indicate renal disease,
while hyponatremia is a common finding in patients with heart failure or cirrhosis.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone levels may be indicated as part of an initial screen, especially if other features of
the history and physical examination suggest hypothyroidism.
ECG and a chest x-ray are advisable to evaluate for evidence of cardiac congestion, especially when
the physical examination demonstrates elevated jugular venous pressure or abnormal cardiopulmonary
examination findings.
If abnormalities are found on ECG and chest x-ray, then echocardiography is indicated. Echocardiography
can establish right or left heart dysfunction as a cause of congestive features or can suggest pulmonary
hypertension as a result of pulmonary disease or sleep-disordered breathing.
Measurement of BNP or NT-proBNP is also useful in the diagnosis or exclusion of heart failure.[51] [52]
 Follow-up testing evaluates the underlying reason for the cardiac or pulmonary dysfunction.
Lymphoscintigraphy
Lymphoscintigraphy can objectively distinguish lymphatic pathology from other causes of peripheral edema;
however, it is rarely used in the routine investigation of peripheral edema.
Lymphoscintigraphy involves peripheral intradermal or subcutaneous injection of a radiolabeled tracer.
Images are recorded with a gamma camera to demonstrate the flow of the tracer through the lymphatic
system.
Signs of lymphatic dysfunction include delayed, asymmetric, or absent violation of regional lymph nodes, and
"dermal backflow" (presence of radiolabeled tracer in the dermal lymphatic channels).[53] A normal result
shows symmetric transport of the tracer through discrete lymph nodes.[54] Lymphoscintigraphy has a 96%
sensitivity and 100% specificity for lymphedema.[55]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials overview
Common
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF)
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)
Cor pulmonale
Sleep apnea
Deep vein thrombosis
Chronic venous insufficiency
Nephrotic syndrome
Cirrhosis
Pregnancy
Medication-induced edema
Premenstrual edema
Uncommon
Pericardial effusion
Constrictive pericarditis
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Tricuspid regurgitation
Nonthrombotic venous outflow obstruction
Hepatic venous outflow obstruction (includes Budd-Chiari syndrome and hepatic veno-occlusive disease)
Renal failure
Protein-losing enteropathy
Angioedema
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Uncommon
Sepsis
Compartment syndrome
Primary lymphedema
Secondary lymphedema
Idiopathic
Severe malnutrition
Hypothyroidism/myxedema
Ruptured popliteal fossa cyst
Pelvic tumor causing external pressure on pelvic veins
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials
Common
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
dyspnea, orthopnea,
and paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea,
angina
bilateral edema,
S3 gallop, rales,
cool extremities,
hepatomegaly, ascites,
elevated jugular venous
pressure
»ECG: Q waves, left
ventricular hypertrophy,
bundle branch block,
atrial fibrillation, or left
axis deviation
ECG is a useful
test when cardiac
dysfunction is
suspected. It provides
additional evidence
to modify the post-
test probability of
ischemic systolic heart
failure as a cause of
peripheral edema. It
is not a definitive test,
as it cannot define
the cardiac function.
Normal ECG or only
minor abnormalities
makes left ventricular
cardiac dysfunction
unlikely as cause of the
peripheral edema.[57]
»CXR: cardiomegaly or
pulmonary edema
CXR is a reasonable
screening test to
provide supplemental
clues as to
cardiopulmonary
etiology of venous
congestion, but it does
not define cardiac
function.
»B-type natriuretic
peptide (BNP) or
N-terminal pro-
BNP (NT-proBNP):
elevated
A low normal BNP level
(<100 nanograms/L
[<100 picograms/mL])
or a low NT-proBNP
level (<300 nanograms/
L [<300 picograms/
mL]) is helpful in
excluding congestive
heart failure.[51] An
NT-proBNP level <400
nanograms/L (<400
picograms/mL) in an
untreated person with
chronic symptoms
makes a diagnosis
of heart failure less
likely.[52] Several
other cardiac and non-
cardiac conditions may
also be associated with
elevated levels.[23]
»cardiac troponins:
normal or elevated
Performed if acute
cardiac ischemia is
suspected as the cause
of heart failure.
»echocardiography:
low ejection fraction
(<40%); focal
abnormalities of wall
motion
Echocardiography
is best employed
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Common
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
for patients who
have a suggestion
of cardiopulmonary
disease on history,
physical examination,
and screening ECG
and CXR. A cardiac
cause of edema is
difficult to predict based
solely on physical exam
and history.[58]
◊ Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
more likely in patients
who are female, of
advanced age, and
possibly those with
history of hypertension;
dyspnea, orthopnea,
and paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea
bilateral edema; no
examination feature
clearly distinguishes
systolic from diastolic
heart failure; S4, rales,
hepatomegaly, or
ascites may be found;
elevated jugular venous
pressure
»ECG: left ventricular
hypertrophy, bundle
branch block, left axis
deviation
ECG is a useful
test when cardiac
dysfunction is
suspected as a cause
of peripheral edema.
It is not a definitive
test, as it cannot define
the cardiac function.
A normal ECG or only
minor abnormalities
makes left ventricular
cardiac dysfunction
unlikely as cause of the
peripheral edema.[57]
»CXR: can
demonstrate
cardiomegaly or
pulmonary edema,
which would support
the possibility of heart
failure
»echocardiography:
HFpEF, hypertrophy
Echocardiography
is best employed
for patients who
have a suggestion
of cardiopulmonary
disease on history,
physical examination,
or screening ECG
and CXR. One study
found that 23% of
patients referred for
echocardiography to
evaluate peripheral
edema had evidence
of cardiac etiology.[58]
Demonstrates impaired
ventricular relaxation.
Approximately half of
patients with clinical
signs of heart failure
have preserved
ejection fraction on
echocardiography.[59]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
CXR is a reasonable
screening test to
provide supplemental
clues as to a
cardiopulmonary
etiology of venous
congestion, but it does
not define cardiac
function.
»BNP or NT-proBNP:
elevated
A low normal BNP level
(<100 nanograms/L
[<100 picograms/mL])
or a low NT-proBNP
level (<300 nanograms/
L [<300 picograms/
mL]) is helpful in
excluding congestive
heart failure.[51] An
NT-proBNP level <400
nanograms/L (<400
picograms/mL) in an
untreated person with
chronic symptoms
makes a diagnosis
of heart failure less
likely.[52] Several
other cardiac and non-
cardiac conditions may
also be associated with
elevated levels.[23]
◊ Cor pulmonale
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of COPD,
pulmonary emboli,
or sleep apnea may
suggest pulmonary
hypertension resulting
in cor pulmonale
bilateral edema;
abnormal lung
examination with
wheezing or
rales; ascites and
hepatomegaly;
elevated jugular venous
pressure
»echocardiography:
elevated pulmonary
arterial pressure
A finding of elevated
pulmonary arterial
pressure in the
absence of left
heart failure should
prompt an evaluation
for pulmonary or
pulmonary vascular
disease underlying
»spirometry: reduced
forced expiratory
volume in one second
(FEV1) with a reduced
absolute FEV1/forced
vital capacity (FVC)
ratio suggests an
obstructive pattern;
reduced FEV1 with a
normal or increased
absolute FEV1/FVC
ratio suggests a
restrictive pattern
»CT scan of chest:
hyperexpansion and
bulla of emphysema
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Common
◊ Cor pulmonale
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
the pulmonary
hypertension.
or segmental filling
defects of pulmonary
emboli
»V/Q scan: segmental
filling defects of
pulmonary emboli
»polysomnography:
hypopnea/apnea
episodes
»right heart
catheterization:
elevated right heart
pressure
Right heart
catheterization is the
most accurate method
of measurement of
right ventricular and
pulmonary pressures
but is rarely required.
◊ Sleep apnea
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
snoring, respiratory
pauses during sleep;
daytime somnolence
bilateral edema;
obesity, large tonsils,
short neck with large
circumference
»echocardiography:
pulmonary
hypertension
In the evaluation of
peripheral edema, if
the echocardiography
demonstrates
pulmonary
hypertension, then
subsequent testing
will be needed to
establish the cause.
Polysomnography
would be part of this
evaluation especially
for patients with history
and examination
»polysomnography:
hypopnea/apnea
episodes
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Sleep apnea
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
features of obstructive
sleep apnea.
Deep vein thrombosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
acute/subacute calf
pain and unilateral
edema; pain may
be localized over
the deep venous
system; risk factors
include immobility,
malignancy, personal,
or family history of
prior thromboembolic
disease, surgery,
pregnancy, or hormonal
therapy; the Wells
clinical prediction
rule predicts pretest
probability
unilateral edema;
asymmetric tenderness,
warmth, erythema,
and palpable cords
behind the leg; dilated
superficial veins over
the foot and leg;
normal jugular venous
pressure
»D-dimer: normal
results have high
negative predictive
value in patients with
low clinical pretest
probability. Elevated
levels have 98%
sensitivity but low
specificity for thrombus
This test should
be ordered only if
results will change
management. Unilateral
edema with acute or
subacute onset in a
patient with low clinical
pretest probability
(Wells score <2) is
where it has greatest
utility. Patients with
high pretest probability
(Wells score ≥2) should
proceed directly to
duplex ultrasound.
Ultrasound can safely
be omitted in patients
with a low pretest
probability of deep
vein thrombosis and a
negative D-dimer.[17]
»duplex ultrasound
with compression:
positive when thrombus
is found
Ultrasound is indicated
when there is
»venography: positive
when thrombus is found
Definitive test for
evaluation of venous
thrombus. May also
be used to provide
alternative visualization
of venous compression
or stenosis even in the
absence of thrombus.
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Common
Deep vein thrombosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
asymmetric edema
of acute or subacute
onset. Sensitivity is
77% to 100% with
a weighted mean
sensitivity of 89%
for symptomatic
patients.[60] Patients
at very high risk for
thrombosis may merit
evaluation for deep vein
thrombosis even when
the edema is bilateral.
Ultrasound may also
detect iliac venous
stenosis of May-
Thurner syndrome.[61]
◊ Chronic venous insufficiency
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
chronic swelling,
aching, heavy
sensation of the legs,
worse after standing;
risk factors include
older age, female sex,
obesity, pregnancy,
family history of
varicose veins, prior
leg injury, or history of
venous thrombosis
bilateral or unilateral
leg edema; dark
reddish-brown skin
hyperpigmentation
over the shins or skin
ulcerations around
malleoli; varicose veins;
eczematous changes
(venous dermatitis);
lipodermatosclerosis
creating inverted bottle-
like contour; white
scars/atrophic blanche;
normal jugular venous
pressure
»none: no initial test,
diagnosis is usually
clinical
»duplex ultrasound:
may show location of
venous incompetence
and degree of venous
reflux
Clinical features
alone can make the
diagnosis of venous
insufficiency in up to
75% of patients.[62]
Testing is usually
used when surgery
is being considered.
A number of imaging
modalities are available
to diagnose venous
insufficiency but triplex
ultrasound is the
definitive standard.[63]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Nephrotic syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
frothing of urine from
increased protein
content; change in
urine frequency or color
may be seen
bilateral and
generalized edema
from hypoproteinemia;
edema may be seen
in the periorbital
region as well as
in the extremities;
normal jugular venous
pressure
»serum albumin:
albumin level of <2 g/
dL is usually required
to cause peripheral
edema
A finding of low serum
albumin prompts
investigation to
determine whether the
etiology is due to loss
in the urine, hepatic
synthetic dysfunction,
or gastrointestinal
losses.
»serum creatinine:
elevated creatinine
suggests renal
dysfunction
New-onset renal
dysfunction may
contribute to
volume overload in
conjunction with protein
wasting.[68]
»urinalysis: high-
grade proteinuria (4+)
A finding of high-
grade proteinuria on
screening urinalysis
requires further
evaluation with urine
microscopy and
quantitative urinary
protein measurement.
»urine microscopy:
fat droplets inside
kidney cells shed into
the urine (oval fat
bodies), which appear
like a cross under
polarized light (Maltese
cross)
»spot urine protein:
protein-creatinine ratio
>0.3 g protein per 1
mmol creatinine
»24-hour urine
collection: >3.5 g/dL
(proteinuria)
◊ Cirrhosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
risk factors for viral
hepatitis, excess
alcohol consumption,
bilateral edema; liver
shrunken and nodular;
splenomegaly and/
»liver function
tests (including
coagulation
»liver
ultrasonography
with duplex: small
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Common
◊ Cirrhosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Wilson disease,
hemochromatosis,
primary sclerosing
cholangitis, primary
biliary cirrhosis,
autoimmune
hepatitis, metabolic
dysfunction-associated
steatohepatitis
(formerly known
as nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis),
alpha-1-antitrypsin
deficiency; some cases
are cryptogenic; may
have constitutional
symptoms e.g. fatigue,
weakness and weight
loss
or ascites; jaundice
and scleral icterus;
engorged periumbilical
veins (caput medusae);
spider nevi; normal
jugular venous
pressure
studies): low albumin,
prolonged prothrombin
time, and increased
bilirubin suggests liver
synthetic and metabolic
dysfunction
Transaminases may
be elevated, but this
can be misleading,
as elevation may
be absent in
chronic cirrhosis.
Transaminases may
also be elevated
from passive hepatic
congestion in
cardiopulmonary
dysfunction.
Prothrombin time is a
useful indicator of liver
synthetic function.
scarred liver with
elevated portal
pressure and
splenomegaly
Hepatic ultrasound
may demonstrate
findings suggestive of
the underlying etiology
of the cirrhosis.
◊ Pregnancy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
pregnancy is commonly
associated with lower-
extremity edema
starting in the second
trimester, due to
increased total body
fluid as a result of
hormonal changes and
mechanical pressure on
the inferior vena cava
from the gravid uterus
bilateral edema, usually
mild; pregnancy should
be clinically evident
by the time it begins
to cause peripheral
edema
»human chorionic
gonadotropin:
positive
Edema in the context
of normal pregnancy
is common. In
preeclampsia the
edema is associated
with hypertension and
proteinuria.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
Medication-induced edema
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
onset of edema
coincides with initiation
of medication;
use of calcium-
channel blocking
agents (especially
dihydropyridines),
agents that cause
vasodilation (minoxidil,
diazoxide), or agents
that block renal
prostaglandin synthesis
(nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs)
causes renal fluid
and salt retention
and contributes to
peripheral edema;
other medication
classes associated
with peripheral
edema include
antidepressants,
estrogens,
corticosteroids,
intrathecal opioids,
gabapentin or
pregabalin, mitogen-
activated protein kinase
enzyme inhibitors,
hypoglycemic agents
in the thiazolidinedione
class and levodopa.
bilateral edema;
normal jugular venous
pressure
»none: no specific
tests; clinical suspicion
is driven by new
medication use prior
to onset of edema
and supported by
improvement in edema
with medication
withdrawal
◊ Premenstrual edema
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
onset of edema is
related to the hormone
fluctuations that occur
during the normal
menstrual cycle;
appears in a cyclic
pattern, most often
in the luteal phase
(the 5-7 day window
prior to menses);
may be a symptom
experienced as a
may reveal a cyclical
pattern of weight gain
and lower extremity
edema during the
luteal phase (the 5-7
day window prior to
menses)
»none: no initial test;
diagnosis is usually
clinical
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Common
◊ Premenstrual edema
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
part of premenstrual
syndrome, and
therefore may be
associated with other
symptoms such as
sadness, irritability,
fatigue, or breast
tenderness or swelling;
secondary to hormone
normalization
Uncommon
Pericardial effusion
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
substernal chest
pain, dyspnea, and
dizziness; history
of risk factors for
pericardial effusion
(connective tissue
disease, chest trauma,
myocardial infarction,
cardiac surgery,
uremia, tuberculosis, or
malignancy)
bilateral edema; pulsus
paradoxus; severe
cases may have
hypotension; loss of
jugular atrial Y descent;
muffled heart sounds;
potential pericardial
rub; elevated jugular
venous pressure
»ECG: diffuse concave
ST elevation, PR
depression, and later
T-wave flattening and
inversions; low voltages
ECG may be done as
part of initial evaluation
but is not diagnostic for
pericardial effusion.
»CXR: enlarged,
globular cardiac
silhouette
CXR may be done as
part of initial evaluation
but is not diagnostic for
pericardial effusion.
»echocardiography:
positive for pericardial
effusion
Echocardiography
is best employed
for patients who
have a suggestion
of cardiopulmonary
disease on history,
physical exam, or
screening ECG and
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Pericardial effusion
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
CXR. In tamponade,
echocardiography will
demonstrate effusion,
inspiratory increase
in right ventricle size,
and decreased left
ventricle size. Plethora
of the inferior vena cava
(i.e., <50% decrease
in inferior vena cava
diameter with deep
inspiration) and
diastolic collapse of the
right heart chambers
are seen.
◊ Constrictive pericarditis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
risk factors (radiation
exposure, connective
tissue disease, chest
trauma, myocardial
infarction, cardiac
surgery, uremia,
tuberculosis, or
malignancy); history
of pericarditis; gradual
development of
symptoms of cardiac
congestion
bilateral edema,
ascites, hepatomegaly;
pericardial knock; large
Y descent of jugular
pressure, Kussmaul
sign (rise in jugular
venous pressure on
inspiration); elevated
jugular venous
pressure
»CXR: pericardial
calcification may be
seen
Pericardial calcification
is often best seen on
lateral CXR, but the
finding is nonspecific.
»ECG: nonspecific;
QRS voltage is
usually low; T waves
nonspecifically
abnormal; atrial
fibrillation
ECG may be done as
part of initial evaluation
but is not specific for
constrictive pericarditis.
»echocardiography:
increased pericardial
thickness and abnormal
ventricular filling
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Constrictive pericarditis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Other findings
suggestive of
constrictive pericarditis
include flattening of
the left ventricular
posterior wall during
diastole, rapid left atrial
emptying, and a dilated
inferior vena cava.
◊ Restrictive cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of infiltrative
disease such as
amyloidosis or
hemochromatosis
bilateral edema,
hepatomegaly,
ascites, Kussmaul
sign (rise in jugular
venous pressure on
inspiration), S3, mitral
regurgitation murmur,
elevated jugular venous
pressure
»ECG: typically
nonspecifically
abnormal, with ST-
segment and T-
wave abnormalities;
sometimes low voltage
ECG may be done
as part of initial
evaluation but is not
diagnostic for restrictive
cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiography:
restricted filling, normal
or mildly reduced
systolic function
Important to
distinguish restrictive
cardiomyopathy from
constrictive pericarditis.
◊ Tricuspid regurgitation
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of congenital
valve defects,
rheumatic heart
disease, or endocarditis
bilateral edema;
holosystolic murmur
at left lower sternal
border; prominent
ventricular impulse
»echocardiography:
tricuspid valvular
regurgitation
Typically, severe
regurgitation would
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Tricuspid regurgitation
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
in the left parasternal
region; hepatomegaly;
elevated jugular venous
pressure
be seen if peripheral
edema is clinically
evident.
◊ Nonthrombotic venous outflow obstruction
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
unilateral leg pain and
swelling (affects the
left leg only in May-
Thurner syndrome
[compression of the
left common iliac vein
by the overlying right
common iliac artery]);
increases risk for deep
vein thrombosis in the
affected vein; may
be history of prior
thrombus
unilateral leg edema
(affecting left leg
only in May-Thurner
syndrome); potentially
cutaneous signs
of chronic venous
insufficiency; normal
jugular venous
pressure
»duplex ultrasound
with compression:
positive for
compression
In May-Thurner
syndrome, the
compression affects
the left common iliac
vein between the right
common iliac artery
and the overlying
vertebrae.[61]
»CT venography
(CTV) or MR
venography
(MRV): positive for
compression
CTV or MRV can help
to demonstrate the
extent of compression
if the duplex ultrasound
is insufficient.[64]
[65] CTV or MRV
may also be used to
exclude extravascular
pathologies causing
obstruction.
»venography: positive
when venous stenosis
is observed
May be used to provide
alternative visualization
of venous compression
or stenosis even
in the absence of
thrombus.[66]
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Uncommon
Hepatic venous outflow obstruction (includes Budd-Chiari
syndrome and hepatic veno-occlusive disease)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
right upper quadrant
abdominal pain;
thrombophilia and/
or hematologic
disorders such as
myeloproliferative
disorders or
paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria; prior
stem cell transplant,
liver irradiation,
or chemotherapy
increases risk of
hepatic veno-occlusive
disease
bilateral edema;
tender hepatomegaly,
jaundice, ascites
»liver function
panel: elevated
bilirubin >2 mg/dL,
elevated transaminases
and elevated alkaline
phosphatase
The level of
abnormalities in the
liver function panel
depends on how
acutely the venous
obstruction has
developed. Fulminant
Budd-Chiari syndrome
can cause marked
transaminase and
alkaline phosphatase
elevation and may lead
to acute hepatic failure.
»duplex ultrasound
of the liver:
demonstrates
obstruction of blood
flow through the liver
In Budd-Chiari
syndrome, the
obstruction will
be found at the
level of the hepatic
veins, usually from
thrombus secondary
to intravascular webs
or compression from
a mass. A more
chronic form of hepatic
venous obstruction is
hepatic veno-occlusive
disease (HVOD)
(sinusoidal obstruction
syndrome), which
may occur after stem
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Hepatic venous outflow obstruction (includes Budd-Chiari
syndrome and hepatic veno-occlusive disease)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
cell transplantation,
chemotherapy, or
abdominal radiation.
In HVOD, reversal
of portal blood flow
may be observed on
imaging.
»CT or MRI: may show
occlusion of hepatic
veins, inferior vena
cava, or both
MRI is more accurate
than CT and allows
optimal delineation of
venous obstruction
for therapeutic
decisions.[67]
Renal failure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
decreased urinary
output; hematuria
bilateral edema; may
have associated ascites
or pulmonary rales;
hypertension may be
seen; elevated jugular
venous pressure from
total body fluid overload
»serum creatinine:
increased creatinine
indicates renal
dysfunction
Serial testing of serum
creatinine, in parallel
with close monitoring
of urine output, is key
to the diagnosis of
renal failure. Oliguric
or anuric renal failure
results in net body
fluid overload and
represents a need
for urgent evaluation
and treatment.[69]
Lesser degrees of renal
insufficiency may be
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Uncommon
Renal failure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
a contributing factor
to peripheral edema
in combination with
other etiologies. Further
evaluation for etiology
of renal failure indicated
if increased creatinine
is detected.
»blood urea nitrogen
(BUN): elevated
BUN indicates renal
dysfunction
Serial testing of serum
BUN, in parallel with
close monitoring of
urine output, is key
to the diagnosis of
renal failure. The BUN-
creatinine ratio can be
used to help distinguish
prerenal from intrinsic
renal failure.
»urine output:
decreased urine output
Close monitoring of
urine output is needed;
and oliguric or anuric
renal failure with fluid
overload causing
peripheral edema
merits nephrology
consultation.[69]
»urinalysis with
microscopy:
proteinuria, red blood
cells (RBCs), hyaline
casts, or eosinophils
Typical findings vary
with type of renal
failure: prerenal failure
shows few hyaline
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Renal failure
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
casts; postrenal
failure shows few
hyaline casts and
possible RBCs; acute
tubular necrosis
shows epithelial
cells, muddy-brown
coarsely granular
casts, and white
blood cells (WBCs);
allergic interstitial
nephritis shows WBCs,
RBCs, epithelial cells,
eosinophils, possible
WBC casts, and low to
moderate proteinuria;
glomerulonephritis
shows RBC casts,
dysmorphic RBCs, and
moderate to severe
proteinuria.
◊ Protein-losing enteropathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
severe diarrhea
suggests protein-losing
enteropathy
bilateral edema from
hypoproteinemia
is generalized and
may be seen in the
periorbital region
as well as in the
extremities; normal
jugular venous
pressure
»serum albumin:
albumin level <2 g/
dL is usually required
to cause peripheral
edema
Finding of low serum
albumin prompts
investigation to
determine whether the
etiology is due to loss
in the urine, hepatic
synthetic dysfunction,
or gastrointestinal
losses. History of
significant diarrhea in
conjunction with ruling
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Protein-losing enteropathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
out alternative causes
makes the diagnosis.
Angioedema
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
family history of
angioedema or
recent exposure to a
medication such as an
ACE inhibitor may be
elicited
edema is diffuse
in anaphylaxis but
may be localized in
angioedema or focal
infection; normal jugular
venous pressure
»none: there are no
specific tests, suspicion
is usually driven by
clinical features
»C4 level: decreased
in hereditary and
acquired angioedema
Ordered in cases of
angioedema without
urticaria. A low level
is suggestive of either
hereditary or acquired
angioedema.
»C1-esterase
inhibitor level:
decreased in hereditary
angioedema
Ordered in cases with
a high suspicion of
hereditary angioedema.
A low level is highly
suggestive of the
diagnosis.
Rarely, patients can
have normal levels of
C1-esterase inhibitor
yet low function.
»C1-esterase
inhibitor function:
decreased in hereditary
angioedema
Given that rare patients
can have normal levels
of C1-esterase inhibitor
yet low function, this
test is ordered in
cases with a high
suspicion of hereditary
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Angioedema
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
angioedema, with a
low level confirming the
diagnosis.
»C1q level: normal in
hereditary angioedema;
decreased in acquired
angioedema
Ordered to help
differentiate between
hereditary and acquired
angioedema.
Sepsis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
symptoms of localized
infection, nonspecific
symptoms include
fever or shivering,
dizziness, nausea
and vomiting, muscle
pain, feeling confused
or disoriented;
may be history of
risk factors e.g.,
immunosuppression,
pregnancy or
postpartum period,
frailty, recent surgery
or invasive procedures,
intravenous drug
use, or breach of skin
integrity
bilateral edema;
diffuse, develops after
fluid resuscitation;
tachycardia, tachypnea,
hypotension, fever
(>100.4ºF [>38ºC])
or hypothermia
(<96.8ºF [<36ºC]),
prolonged capillary
refill, mottled or ashen
skin, cyanosis, low
oxygen saturation,
newly altered mental
state, reduced urine
output
»blood culture: may
be positive for organism
Blood cultures should
be taken immediately,
and preferably
before antibiotics
are started, provided
their sampling will not
delay administration
of antibiotics. Other
cultures (for example,
sputum, stool, and
urine) should be taken
as clinically indicated.
»serum lactate: may
be elevated; levels
>18 mg/dL (>2 mmol/
L) associated with
adverse prognosis;
even worse prognosis
with levels ≥36 mg/dL
(≥4 mmol/L)
Elevated serum
lactate indicates tissue
hypoperfusion, and is
most reliably assessed
»ECG: may show
evidence of ischemia,
atrial fibrillation, or
other arrhythmia; may
be normal
An ECG should
be arranged to
help exclude other
differential diagnoses,
including myocardial
infarction, pericarditis,
and myocarditis. Sepsis
also predisposes to
myocardial dysfunction
and arrhythmias.
»CXR: may show
consolidation;
demonstrates position
of central venous
catheter and tracheal
tube
»urine microscopy
and culture: may
be positive for nitrites,
protein or blood;
elevated leukocyte
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Uncommon
Sepsis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
using an arterial
sample.
»CBC with
differential: WBC
count >12×10⁹/L
(12,000/microliter)
(leukocytosis); WBC
count <4×10⁹/L (4000/
microliter) (leukopenia);
or a normal WBC count
with >10% immature
forms; low platelets
WBC count is sensitive
but not specific for the
diagnosis of sepsis.
»C-reactive protein:
elevated
»BUN and serum
electrolytes: serum
electrolytes may be
deranged; blood urea
may be elevated
»serum creatinine:
may be elevated
Elevated creatinine
may occur in sepsis
associated with renal
dysfunction.
»liver function tests:
may show elevated
bilirubin, alanine
aminotransferase,
aspartate
aminotransferase,
alkaline phosphatase,
and gamma glutamyl
transpeptidase
Sepsis can originate
from hepatic or
perihepatic infections.
Comorbid hepatic
disease can affect drug
metabolism.
count; positive culture
for organism
»sputum culture:
may be positive for
organism
»lumbar puncture:
may be elevated
WBC count, presence
of organism on
microscopy and
positive culture
Performed if meningitis
suspected.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Sepsis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Septic shock can
compromise hepatic
blood flow and
metabolism.
»coagulation
studies: may be
abnormal
»ABG: may be
hypoxia, hypercapnia,
elevated anion gap,
metabolic acidosis
Compartment syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
trauma, fracture,
or infection in the
extremities
unilateral edema; pain
in extremity may be
severe, especially on
passive stretch of the
muscle; compartment
tense to palpation;
muscle weakness;
hypoesthesia; normal
jugular venous
pressure; pulses and
capillary refill may be
normal
»compartment
pressure testing:
variable; differential
pressure within
20-30 mmHg of the
diastolic pressure (delta
pressure) is considered
a strong indicator for
fasciotomy
The perfusion pressure
of a compartment (the
compartment delta
pressure) is defined as
the difference between
the diastolic BP and the
intra-compartmental
pressure (i.e., diastolic
BP minus compartment
pressure). A delta
pressure of ≤30
mmHg is considered
a strong indicator for
fasciotomy.[31] [32] [33]
 However, care should
be taken when using
this criterion in patients
who are receiving
»computed
tomography: evidence
of the mechanism of
the injury (e.g., fracture,
bleeding)
Imaging may be
a helpful adjunct
in the evaluation
of trauma of the
extremity but cannot
make the diagnosis
of compartment
syndrome. If
compartment syndrome
is suspected then
compartment pressure
should be measured.
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Uncommon
Compartment syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
vasodilatory drugs and
whose diastolic BP is
low.
Patients with a
high suspicion for
compartment syndrome
may require immediate
surgery.
◊ Primary lymphedema
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
can result from
congenital
lymphedema,
lymphedema praecox,
lymphedema tarda,
yellow nail syndrome,
or Turner syndrome;
family history of similar
symptoms supports
diagnosis of congenital
lymphedema
unilateral or bilateral
edema; initially pitting;
chronic edema causes
fibrosis, hyperkeratosis,
rough skin texture,
and nonpitting edema;
Stemmer sign is
indicative (i.e., inability
to pinch and lift a fold
of skin at the base of
the second toe); jugular
venous pressure
normal; lymphedema
graded on a 3-stage
scale
»none: no initial test,
diagnosis is usually
clinical
»lymphoscintigraphy:
normal result shows
symmetrical transport
of the tracer through
discrete lymph nodes;
slow movement
of tracer suggests
hypoplasia of the
lymphatic system;
tracer outside of
lymph routes suggests
obstruction
Isotope
lymphoscintigraphy
has a sensitivity of
73% to 97% and a
specificity of 100%.[70]
This diagnostic test
would not generally be
ordered if diagnosis
of lymphedema was
evident based on
clinical history (e.g.,
history of radical lymph
node dissection).[71]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Secondary lymphedema
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
secondary
lymphedema caused
by malignancy, prior
radiation, surgery,
or infection (e.g.,
filariasis); history
focuses on these
possibilities and
eliciting systemic
symptoms such as
unexplained weight loss
unilateral or bilateral,
initially pitting; if
chronic, causes
fibrosis, hyperkeratosis,
rough skin texture,
and nonpitting edema;
unilateral lymphedema
following cancer
treatment may be
measured as the
circumference of the
affected limb being
>2 cm or volume
>10% compared
with the unaffected
limb; Stemmer sign is
indicative (i.e., inability
to pinch and lift a fold
of skin at the base
of the second toe);
normal jugular venous
pressure
»none: no initial test,
diagnosis is usually
clinical
»lymphoscintigraphy:
normal result shows
symmetric transport
of the tracer through
discrete lymph nodes;
slow movement
of tracer suggests
hypoplasia of the
lymphatic system;
tracer outside of
lymph routes suggests
obstruction
Isotope
lymphoscintigraphy
has a sensitivity of
73% to 97% and a
specificity of 100%.[70]
This diagnostic test
would not generally be
ordered if diagnosis
of lymphedema was
evident based on
clinical history (e.g.,
history of radical lymph
node dissection).
»Giemsa stain of
peripheral blood
smear: microfilaria of 
Wuchereria bancrofti  or
Brugia  spp. present in
filariasis
Microfilariae of 
Wuchereria bancrofti 
and  Brugia  spp.
exhibit a nocturnal
periodicity, and an
accurate diagnosis is
best achieved on blood
collected at night.[72]
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Idiopathic
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
onset age 20 to 60
years, usually in the
third or fourth decade;
worsened by orthostatic
position; cyclical pattern
but not associated
with menses; may
be associated
with psychological
symptoms and diuretic,
laxative, or bulimic
behaviors
bilateral edema periodic
swelling of extremities
and face; abdominal
bloating; normal jugular
venous pressure
»none: no routine
tests, as this is a
diagnosis of exclusion
Severe malnutrition
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
longstanding and
profound decreased
dietary intake
bilateral edema from
hypoproteinemia
is generalized
and may be seen
in the periorbital
region as well as
in the extremities;
muscle wasting from
malnutrition should
be evident, although
muscle loss induced
by protein deficiency
may be masked
by fluid retention;
normal jugular venous
pressure
»serum albumin:
albumin level of <2 g/
dL is usually required
to cause peripheral
edema
A finding of low serum
albumin prompts
an investigation to
determine whether the
etiology is due to loss
in the urine, hepatic
synthetic dysfunction,
gastrointestinal losses,
or reduced intake. The
history and examination
would usually suggest
malnutrition as a
cause of severe
hypoproteinemia and
edema.
Hypothyroidism/myxedema
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
fatigue, cold
intolerance, dry skin,
bilateral nonpitting
edema occurs on the
»thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH):
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Hypothyroidism/myxedema
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
constipation, weight
gain, coarse hair
backs of the hands,
and in periorbital
and pretibial regions;
normal jugular venous
pressure
elevation of
TSH suggests
hypothyroidism
Severe hypothyroidism
is associated with
myxedema. At
its most extreme,
myxedema coma is
an endocrinologic
emergency.
◊ Ruptured popliteal fossa cyst
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
acute, unilateral,
painful calf swelling;
symptoms may be
clinically similar to
deep vein thrombosis;
gastrocnemius bursa
cysts are more
common in knees with
prior pathology such as
arthritis
unilateral edema;
may have been a
palpable enlargement
of the gastrocnemius
bursa prior to rupture;
normal jugular venous
pressure
»ultrasound:
hypoechoic regions
superficial to the
muscles of the mid calf
Pelvic tumor causing external pressure on pelvic veins
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
back pain, hematuria,
flank pain, abdominal
bloating, abnormal
vaginal bleeding
or discharge, or
unintentional weight
loss
a mass may be felt
upon palpation of the
abdomen
»ultrasound
of abdomen:
transvaginal is most
common; may reveal
complex components,
bilateral tumors,
ascites, mass >10 cm,
and mural nodules
All of these increase
the likelihood of a
malignant mass.
»computed
tomography scan
of abdomen:
recommended as
»MRI of abdomen:
may reveal presence of
pelvic mass
»PET scan: may be
useful once mass
has been detected, to
differentiate between
malignant and benign
pelvic mass, as well as
assess for metastases
»cystoscopy: may be
used for evaluation of
hematuria; may reveal
lesions or mass that
can be biopsied and
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Diagnosis
Uncommon
Pelvic tumor causing external pressure on pelvic veins
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
a first test in men
and a second test
(after transvaginal
ultrasound) in women;
may reveal presence of
pelvic mass
resected during the
procedure
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Evidence tables
EVIDENCE TABLES
Evidence tables
What are the effects of early versus late initiation of empiric antimicrobial
treatment in adults with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis?[34]
This table is a summary of the analysis reported in a guideline (underpinned by a systematic review)
that focuses on the above important clinical question.
View the full source guideline (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51/evidence)
Evidence C *
Confidence in the evidence is very low or low where GRADE has been performed
and the intervention may be more effective/beneficial than the comparison for key
outcomes. However, this is uncertain and new evidence could change this in the
future.
Population: Adults with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis
Intervention: Early initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Comparison: Late initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
<1 hour versus >1 hour
Mortality ᵃ Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality: intensive care unit
(ICU) setting
Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality: emergency
department (ED) setting
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<2 hours versus >2 hours
Mortality ᵃ No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Mortality: ICU setting Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality: ED setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<3 hours versus >3 hours
Mortality ᵃ Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality: ICU setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Evidence tables
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
Mortality: ED setting Favors intervention Very Low
<4 hours versus >4 hours
Mortality: ED setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<5 hours versus >5 hours
Mortality: ED setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<6 hours versus >6 hours
Mortality ᵃ Favors intervention Very Low
Mortality: ICU setting No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Mortality: ED setting Favors intervention Very Low
Recommendations as stated in the source guideline
The guideline committee recommends that adults, children, and young people over the age of 12 who have
suspected sepsis and one or more high-risk criteria should be given a broad-spectrum antimicrobial at the
maximum recommended dose without delay (within one hour of establishing they meet high-risk criteria in an
acute hospital s e t t i n g ) . ᵇ  See guideline for details on criteria for different levels of risk.
Note
Results in this table are based on observational studies only.
ᵃ  Includes overall mortality in intensive care and emergency department settings.
ᵇ  This guideline recommends that all people with suspected sepsis have a face-to-face assessment and that
a risk stratification tool is used to determine risk of severe illness and death from sepsis. Recommendations
depend on the presence and number of high-, moderate-to-high, and low-risk criteria.
EVIDENCE TABLES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Evidence tables
EVIDENCE TABLES
What are the effects of early versus late initiation of empiric antimicrobial
treatment in children with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis?[34]
This table is a summary of the analysis reported in a guideline (underpinned by a systematic review)
that focuses on the above important clinical question.
View the full source guideline (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51/evidence)
Evidence C *
Confidence in the evidence is very low or low where GRADE has been performed
and the intervention may be more effective/beneficial than the comparison for key
outcomes. However, this is uncertain and new evidence could change this in the
future.
Population: Children with or at risk of developing sepsis or severe sepsis
Intervention: Early initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Comparison: Late initiation of empiric antimicrobial treatment
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
<1 hour versus >1 hour ᵃ 
 Pediatric Intensive Care Unit
(PICU) mortality
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<2 hours versus >2 hours ᵃ 
 PICU mortality No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
<3 hours versus >3 hours ᵃ 
 PICU mortality Favors intervention Very Low
<4 hours versus >4 hours ᵃ 
 PICU mortality Favors intervention Very Low
Recommendations as stated in the source guideline
The National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guideline on Sepsis: recognition, diagnosis and
early management makes the following recommendation:
For children aged 5–11 years who have suspected sepsis and one or more high-risk criteria, give a broad-
spectrum a n t i m i c r o b i a l ᵇ  at the maximum recommended dose without delay (within one hour of identifying that
they meet any high-risk criteria in an acute hospital setting).
Note
The guideline group noted that the direct evidence in children came from one small (n=130), single-
centre retrospective study of children in PICU with severe sepsis and septic shock. Therefore, they also
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Evidence tables
extrapolated from the indirect evidence in adults to make the same recommendation for all age groups
(including children aged under 5 years and 5–11 years).
ᵃ  Time from sepsis recognition to initial treatment and first appropriate treatment.
ᵇ  See full guideline for more information.
* Evidence levels
The Evidence level is an internal rating applied by BMJ Best Practice. See the EBM Toolkit (https://
bestpractice.bmj.com/info/evidence-tables/) for details.
Confidence in evidence
A -  High or moderate to high
B -  Moderate or low to moderate
C -  Very low or low
† Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
Based on statistical significance, which demonstrates that the results are unlikely to be due to chance, but
which does not necessarily translate to a clinical significance.
‡ Grade certainty ratings
High The authors are very confident that the true
effect is similar to the estimated effect.
Moderate The authors are moderately confident that
the true effect is likely to be close to the
estimated effect.
Low The authors have limited confidence in the
effect estimate and the true effect may be
substantially different.
Very Low The authors have very little confidence in
the effect estimate and the true effect is
likely to be substantially different.
BMJ Best Practice EBM Toolkit: What is GRADE? (https://bestpractice.bmj.com/info/toolkit/learn-ebm/what-
is-grade/)
EVIDENCE TABLES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema References
REFERENCES
Key articles
• Mortimer PS, Levick JR. Chronic peripheral oedema: the critical role of the lymphatic system. Clin
Med (Lond). 2004 Sep-Oct;4(5):448-53.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.7861/clinmedicine.4-5-448)  
Abstract
• Mortimer PS, Rockson SG. New developments in clinical aspects of lymphatic disease. J Clin Invest.
2014 Mar;124(3):915-21.  Full text (https://www.jci.org/articles/view/71608)   Abstract
• Executive Committee of the International Society of Lymphology. The diagnosis and treatment of
peripheral lymphedema: 2020 Consensus Document of the International Society of Lymphology.
Lymphology. 2020;53(1):3-19.  Full text (https://journals.librarypublishing.arizona.edu/lymph/article/
id/4649)   Abstract
References
1. Mortimer PS, Levick JR. Chronic peripheral oedema: the critical role of the lymphatic system. Clin
Med (Lond). 2004 Sep-Oct;4(5):448-53.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.7861/clinmedicine.4-5-448)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15536876?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Mortimer PS, Rockson SG. New developments in clinical aspects of lymphatic disease. J Clin
Invest. 2014 Mar;124(3):915-21.  Full text (https://www.jci.org/articles/view/71608)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24590276?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Wiig H, Swartz MA. Interstitial fluid and lymph formation and transport: physiological regulation
and roles in inflammation and cancer. Physiol Rev. 2012 Jul;92(3):1005-60.  Full text (https://
journals.physiology.org/doi/full/10.1152/physrev.00037.2011)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22811424?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Quéré I, Palmier S, Noerregaard S, et al. LIMPRINT: estimation of the prevalence of lymphoedema/
chronic oedema in acute hospital in in-patients. Lymphat Res Biol. 2019 Apr;17(2):135-40. 
Full text (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30995191)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30995191?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Rabinovich A, Kahn SR. The postthrombotic syndrome: current evidence and future challenges. J
Thromb Haemost. 2017 Feb;15(2):230-41.  Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/
jth.13569)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27860129?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. Cho S, Atwood JE. Peripheral edema. Am J Med. 2002 Nov;113(7):580-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12459405?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Frishman WH. Effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug therapy on blood pressure and
peripheral edema. Am J Cardiol. 2002 Mar 21;89(6A):18-25D. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11909557?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema References
8. Largeau B, Cracowski JL, Lengellé C, et al. Drug-induced peripheral oedema: an
aetiology-based review. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2021 Aug;87(8):3043-55.  Full text (https://
bpspubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bcp.14752)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33506982?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Fishel RS, Are C, Barbul A. Vessel injury and capillary leak. Crit Care Med. 2003;31(8 suppl):S502-11.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12907879?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Garcia-Tsao G. Portal hypertension. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2006 May;22(3):254-62. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16550040?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Schrier RW. Decreased effective blood volume in edematous disorders: what does this mean? J Am
Soc Nephrol. 2007 Jul;18(7):2028-31.  Full text (https://jasn.asnjournals.org/content/18/7/2028.full)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17568020?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Slavin SA, Greene AK, Borud LJ. Lymphedema. In: Weinzweig J, ed. Plastic surgery secrets plus. 2nd
ed. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby; 2009.
13. Lurie F, Malgor RD, Carman T, et al. The American Venous Forum, American Vein and Lymphatic
Society and the Society for Vascular Medicine expert opinion consensus on lymphedema diagnosis
and treatment. Phlebology. 2022 May;37(4):252-66.  Full text (https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/
full/10.1177/02683555211053532)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35258350?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. DiSipio T, Rye S, Newman B, et al. Incidence of unilateral arm lymphoedema after breast
cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Oncol. 2013 May;14(6):500-15.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(13)70076-7)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23540561?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Moore JE Jr, Bertram CD. Lymphatic system flows. Annu Rev Fluid Mech. 2018 Jan;50:459-82. 
Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5922450)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29713107?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Keast DH, Despatis M, Allen JO, et al. Chronic oedema/lymphoedema: under-recognised and
under-treated. Int Wound J. 2015 Jun;12(3):328-33.  Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/epdf/10.1111/iwj.12224)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24618210?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Di Nisio M, van Es N, Büller HR. Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. Lancet.
2016 Dec 17;388(10063):3060-73. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27375038?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Bhatt S, Wehbe C, Dogra VS. Phlegmasia cerulea dolens. J Clin Utrasound. 2007 Sep;35(7):401-4.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17354247?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Kakkos SK, Gohel M, Baekgaard N, et al. Editor's Choice - European Society for Vascular
Surgery (ESVS) 2021 Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of Venous Thrombosis.
Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg. 2021 Jan;61(1):9-82.  Full text (https://www.ejves.com/article/
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema References
REFERENCES
S1078-5884(20)30868-6/fulltext#secsectitle0630)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33334670?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Singh AD, Makkar N, Ray A, et al. Phlegmasia cerulea dolens presenting with acute compartment
syndrome and pulmonary embolism. BMJ Case Rep. 2018 Jun 13;2018:bcr2018224879.  Full text
(https://casereports.bmj.com/content/2018/bcr-2018-224879.long)
21. Hunter BR, Martindale J, Abdel-Hafez O, et al. Approach to acute heart failure in the
emergency department. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2017 Sep - Oct;60(2):178-86.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1016/j.pcad.2017.08.008)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28865801?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Allen LA, O'Connor CM. Management of acute decompensated heart failure. CMAJ. 2007 Mar
13;176(6):797-805.  Full text (https://www.cmaj.ca/content/176/6/797.full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17353535?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management
of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022 May 3;145(18):e895-1032.  Full
text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001063)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35363499?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Heart valve disease presenting in adults:
investigation and management. Nov 2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/ng208)
25. Bromage D, Mayhew J, Sado D. Managing heart failure related peripheral oedema in primary care.
BMJ. 2020 Jun 22;369:m2099.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m2099)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32571780?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Hoit BD. Pericardial disease and pericardial tamponade. Crit Care Med. 2007 Aug;35(8
suppl):S355-64. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17667460?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Politano SA, Colbert GB, Hamiduzzaman N. Nephrotic syndrome. Prim Care. 2020
Dec;47(4):597-613. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33121631?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Li S, Alsaiqali M, Narayanaswamy M, et al. The vicious cycle of hypothyroidism and severe proteinuria:
a case report. Cureus. 2022 Sep;14(9):e28674.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC9526517)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36199658?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Elkattawy S, Dhanoa P, Kotys J, et al. Myxedema coma: case report and literature review. Cureus.
2021 May 27;13(5):e15277.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8235691)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34194879?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Bayraktar UD, Seren S, Bayraktar Y. Hepatic venous outflow obstruction: three similar syndromes.
World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Apr 7;13(13):1912-27.  Full text (https://www.wjgnet.com/1007-9327/
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema References
full/v13/i13/1912.htm)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17461490?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Olson SA, Glasgow RR. Acute compartment syndrome in lower extremity musculoskeletal
trauma. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2005 Nov;13(7):436-44.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.5435/00124635-200511000-00003)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16272268?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Shadgan B, Menon M, O'Brien PJ, et al. Diagnostic techniques in acute compartment syndrome
of the leg. J Orthop Trauma. 2008 Sep;22(8):581-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18758292?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. McMillan TE, Gardner WT, Schmidt AH, et al. Diagnosing acute compartment syndrome-where have
we got to? Int Orthop. 2019 Nov;43(11):2429-35.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC6848051)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31468110?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Suspected sepsis: recognition, diagnosis and early
management. Mar 2024 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng51)
35. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, et al. The third international consensus definitions
for sepsis and septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA. 2016 Feb 23;315(8):801-10.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2016.0287)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26903338?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: international
guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock 2021. Crit Care Med. 2021 Nov
1;49(11):e1063-143.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/fulltext/2021/11000/
surviving_sepsis_campaign__international.21.aspx)
37. Royal College of Physicians. National Early Warning Score (NEWS) 2. December 2017 [internet
publication].  Full text (http://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/projects/outputs/national-early-warning-score-
news-2)
38. American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP) Expert Panel on Sepsis. DART: an evidence-
driven tool to guide the early recognition and treatment of sepsis and septic shock [internet
publication].  Full text (https://poctools.acep.org/POCTool/Sepsis(DART)/276ed0a9-f24d-45f1-8d0c-
e908a2758e5a)
39. Academy of Medical Royal Colleges. Statement on the initial antimicrobial treatment of sepsis. May
2022 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.aomrc.org.uk/reports-guidance/statement-on-the-
initial-antimicrobial-treatment-of-sepsis)
40. Schlapbach LJ, Watson RS, Sorce LR, et al. International consensus criteria for pediatric sepsis
and septic shock. JAMA. 2024 Feb 27;331(8):665-74.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jama/fullarticle/2814297)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38245889?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema References
REFERENCES
41. Society of Critical Care Medicine. Surviving Sepsis Campaign. Hour-1 Bundle. 2019 [internet
publication].  Full text (https://www.sccm.org/getattachment/SurvivingSepsisCampaign/Guidelines/
Adult-Patients/Surviving-Sepsis-Campaign-Hour-1-Bundle.pdf?lang=en-US)
42. Schroth BE. Evaluation and management of peripheral edema. JAAPA. 2005 Nov;18(11):29-34.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16315498?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Koo LW, Reedy S, Smith JK. Patient history key to diagnosing peripheral edema. Nurse Pract. 2010
Mar;35(3):44-52. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20164736?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Bougea A, Spantideas N, Katoulis A, et al. Levodopa-induced skin disorders in patients with Parkinson
disease: a systematic literature review approach. Acta Neurol Belg. 2019 Sep;119(3):325-36.  Full
text (https://www.doi.org/10.1007/s13760-019-01195-3)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31338806?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Brodovicz KG, McNaughton K, Uemura N, et al. Reliability and feasibility of methods to
quantitatively assess peripheral edema. Clin Med Res. 2009 Jun;7(1-2):21-31.  Full text (http://
www.clinmedres.org/content/7/1-2/21.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19251582?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Goss JA, Greene AK. Sensitivity and specificity of the Stemmer sign for lymphedema:
a clinical lymphoscintigraphic study. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open. 2019
Jun;7(6):e2295.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/prsgo/Fulltext/2019/06000/
Sensitivity_and_Specificity_of_the_Stemmer_Sign.13.aspx)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31624689?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Rea ME, Dunlap ME. Renal hemodynamics in heart failure: implications for treatment. Curr Opin
Nephrol Hypertens. 2008 Jan;17(1):87-92. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18090676?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Schook CC, Mulliken JB, Fishman SJ, et al. Primary lymphedema: clinical features and
management in 138 pediatric patients. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2011 Jun;127(6):2419-31.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1097/PRS.0b013e318213a218)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21617474?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Senger JB, Kadle RL, Skoracki RJ. Current concepts in the management of primary lymphedema.
Medicina (Kaunas). 2023 May 6;59(5):894.  Full text (https://www.mdpi.com/1648-9144/59/5/894)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37241126?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Sudduth CL, Greene AK. Primary lymphedema: update on genetic basis and management. Adv
Wound Care (New Rochelle). 2022 Jul;11(7):374-81.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC9051871)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33502936?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management. Nov
2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg187)
52. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and
management. Sep 2018 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng106)
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema References
53. Szuba A, Shin WS, Strauss HW, et al. The third circulation: radionuclide lymphoscintigraphy
in the evaluation of lymphedema. J Nucl Med. 2003 Jan;44(1):43-57.  Full text (http://
jnm.snmjournals.org/content/44/1/43.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12515876?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Scarsbrook AF, Ganeshan A, Bradley KM. Pearls and pitfalls of radionuclide imaging of the lymphatic
system. Part 2: evaluation of extremity lymphoedema. Br J Radiol. 2007 Mar;80(951):219-26. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16728412?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Hassanein AH, Maclellan RA, Grant FD, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of lymphoscintigraphy
for lymphedema and analysis of false-negative tests. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open.
2017 Jul;5(7):e1396.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/prsgo/Fulltext/2017/07000/
Diagnostic_Accuracy_of_Lymphoscintigraphy_for.16.aspx)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28831342?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Simundic AM, Bölenius K, Cadamuro J, et al. Joint EFLM-COLABIOCLI recommendation for venous
blood sampling. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2018;56(12):2015-38. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30004902?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Davie AP, Francis CM, Love MP, et al. Value of the electrocardiogram in identifying heart failure
due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction. BMJ. 1996 Jan 27;312(7025):222.  Full text (https://
www.bmj.com/content/312/7025/222.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8563589?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58. Shah MG, Cho S, Atwood JE, et al. Peripheral edema due to heart disease: diagnosis and outcome.
Clin Cardiol. 2006 Jan;29(1):31-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16477775?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Gheorghiade M, Filippatos G, De Luca L, et al. Congestion in acute heart failure syndromes: an
essential target of evaluation and treatment. Am J Med. 2006 Dec;119(12 suppl 1):S3-10. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17113398?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Kearon C, Julian JA, Newman TE, et al. Noninvasive diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis. McMaster
Diagnostic Imaging Practice Guidelines. Ann Intern Med. 1998 Apr 15;128(8):663-77. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9537941?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Oğuzkurt L, Özkan U, Tercan F, et al. Ultrasonographic diagnosis of iliac vein compression (May-
Thurner) syndrome. Diagn Interv Radiol. 2007 Sep;13(3):152-5.  Full text (https://www.dirjournal.org/
en/ultrasonographic-diagnosis-of-iliac-vein-compression-may-thurner-syndrome-163278)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17846991?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Valencia IC, Falabella A, Kirsner RS, et al. Chronic venous insufficiency and venous leg ulceration. J
Am Acad Dermatol. 2001 Mar;44(3):401-21. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11209109?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Mantoni M, Larsen L, Lund JO, et al. Evaluation of chronic venous disease in the lower limbs:
comparison of five diagnostic methods. Br J Radiol. 2002 Jul;75(895):578-83. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12145130?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema References
REFERENCES
64. Taha MAH, Busuttil A, Bootun R, et al. A clinical guide to deep venous stenting for chronic iliofemoral
venous obstruction. J Vasc Surg Venous Lymphat Disord. 2022 Jan;10(1):258-66.e1. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34020107?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
65. Mahnken AH, Thomson K, de Haan M, et al. CIRSE standards of practice guidelines on iliocaval
stenting. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2014 Aug;37(4):889-97.  Full text (https://link.springer.com/
article/10.1007/s00270-014-0875-4)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24633533?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Garrie A, Jones LE, Chen JF, et al. New vein compression entities in patients with unexplained
leg swelling. Ann Vasc Surg. 2017 Nov;45:173-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28647635?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Kamath PS. Budd-Chiari syndrome: radiologic findings. Liver Transpl. 2006 Nov;12(11 suppl
2):S21-2.  Full text (https://aasldpubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/lt.20939)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17051559?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. Hilton R. Acute renal failure. BMJ. 2006 Oct 14;333(7572):786-90.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1601981)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17038736?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
69. Babuin L, Alegria JR, Oh JK, et al. Brain natriuretic peptide levels in constrictive pericarditis
and restrictive cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Apr 4;47(7):1489-91. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16580543?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. Tiwari A, Cheng KS, Button M, et al. Differential diagnosis, investigation, and current treatment of
lower limb lymphedema. Arch Surg. 2003 Feb;138(2):152-61.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jamasurgery/fullarticle/394351)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12578410?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
71. Executive Committee of the International Society of Lymphology. The diagnosis and treatment of
peripheral lymphedema: 2020 Consensus Document of the International Society of Lymphology.
Lymphology. 2020;53(1):3-19.  Full text (https://journals.librarypublishing.arizona.edu/lymph/article/
id/4649)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32521126?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Laboratory identification of parasites of public health
concern: lymphatic filariasis. Aug 2019 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/
lymphaticFilariasis/index.html)
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Images
Images
Figure 1: Development of edema: an imbalance between the filtration of fluid from the bloodstream and
drainage via the lymph system.
Created by BMJ Knowledge Centre
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Images
IMAGES
Figure 2: Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) of the right leg with associated swelling and redness
From the collection of James Heilman, MD.
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Images
Figure 3: A clinical assessment scoring system
Created by BMJ Knowledge Centre based on Brodovicz KG, McNaughton K, Uemura N, et al. Reliability and
feasibility of methods to quantitatively assess peripheral edema. Clin Med Res. 2009 Jun;7(1-2):21-31.
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Images
IMAGES
Figure 4: Atrophie blanche and hemosiderin deposition in a patient with chronic venous insufficiency
From the collection of Dr Joseph L. Mills; used with permission
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Images
Figure 5: Approach to the patient with peripheral edema. DVT, deep vein thrombosis; HTN, hypertension
Created by Ethan Cumbler, MD
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Evaluation of peripheral edema Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 31, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Juan N. Lessing, MD, FACP
Associate Professor, University of Colorado School of Medicine
Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Denver, CO
DISCLOSURES: JNL receives an honorarium to serve as an associate editor of Clinical Excellence Board
for Aquifer, Inc., a medical education nonprofit. This role has no specific, tangible, or perceived interest to
the BMJ topic, and is not considered a competing interest.
Laura D. Rosenthal, DNP, ACNP, FAANP
Associate Professor, College of Nursing
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Denver, CO
DISCLOSURES: LDR declares that she has no competing interests.
Ethan Cumbler, MD
Professor of Medicine
Division of Hospital Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Colorado, Denver, CO
DISCLOSURES: EC declares that he has no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Teresa L. Carman, MD, MSVM
Director
Vascular Medicine, University Hospitals Harrington, Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Medical Center,
OH
DISCLOSURES: TLC declares that she has no competing interests.
