# Evaluation of cardiomyopathy

=== Page 1 ===
Evaluation of
cardiomyopathy
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Apr 02, 2025
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Theory  6
Etiology  6
Emergencies  16
Urgent considerations  16
Diagnosis  18
Approach  18
Differentials overview  21
Differentials  23
Online resources  52
References  53
Images  65
Disclaimer  70
=== Page 3 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Overview
Summary
The cardiomyopathies are an important, heterogeneous group of heart muscle diseases that make a
significant contribution to morbidity and mortality.[1] They are associated with mechanical and/or electrical
dysfunction. Inappropriate ventricular hypertrophy or dilatation is usually present.[1] Cardiomyopathy
involvement may be predominantly limited to the heart (primary cardiomyopathy) or form part of a
generalized systemic disorder (secondary cardiomyopathy). Causes vary widely, but genetic etiologies are
most common in primary cardiomyopathies. Complications include cardiovascular death and progressive
heart failure, with its associated disability.[1]
Classifications
In 1995, the World Health Organization/International Society and Federation of Cardiology Task Force
classified cardiomyopathies as primary myocardial disorders, whereas heart muscle diseases of known
etiology or associated with systemic diseases were categorized as secondary or specific heart muscle
diseases.[2] However, as research has improved the understanding of these conditions, working groups have
proposed new but different classification systems. 
The scientific statement from the American Heart Association has defined cardiomyopathies as "a
heterogeneous group of diseases of the myocardium associated with mechanical and/or electrical
dysfunction that usually (but not invariably) exhibit inappropriate ventricular hypertrophy or dilatation and are
due to a variety of causes that frequently are genetic. Cardiomyopathies either are confined to the heart or
are part of generalized systemic disorders, often leading to cardiovascular death or progressive heart failure-
related disability."[1]
• Primary cardiomyopathies are those where the condition is predominantly confined to the heart muscle
and where subclassifications of genetic, mixed, and acquired are adopted.
• Secondary cardiomyopathies are those where myocardial involvement occurs as part of a systemic or
multiorgan disorder.
The European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases has opted to
use a clinical rather than genetic classification, where heart muscle disorders are classified according to
morphology and function: "a myocardial disorder in which the heart muscle is structurally and functionally
abnormal, in the absence of coronary artery disease, hypertension, valvular disease and congenital heart
disease sufficient to cause the observed myocardial abnormality."[3] Its members felt that many primary
cardiomyopathies have significant extracardiac manifestations and that many secondary cardiomyopathies
may involve the heart as the major manifestation.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Overview
OVERVIEW
Diseases that may cause cardiomyopathy
Elliott P, et al. Eur Heart J 2008; 29: 270-76; used with permission
It is important to recognize that the traditional classification into hypertrophic, dilated, and restrictive
cardiomyopathies mixes anatomical with functional designations, which are not mutually exclusive.
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Overview
Proposed classification system
Elliott P, Andersson B, Arbustini E, et al. Classification of the cardiomyopathies: a position
statement from the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Myocardial
and Pericardial Diseases. Eur Heart J. 2008;29:270-276. Used with permission.
The American Heart Association published a separate scientific statement in 2019, covering the classification
and diagnosis of cardiomyopathy in children.[4] This favours a classification for pediatric cases based
primarily on the structural and functional phenotype (which forms the basis for diagnosis and management),
with genetic and nongenetic causes as lower-level subcategories.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Theory
THEORY
Etiology
The American Heart Association Working Group classification will generally be used below.[1]
Primary cardiomyopathies: genetic
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
• A relatively common condition affecting about 1 in 500 of the general population, across racial
groups.[5] [6] Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by the development of a
hypertrophied, nondilated left ventricle (LV) in the absence of another predisposing condition (such as
aortic stenosis or hypertension).
Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 4-chamber echocardiographic view with contrast
Ahmed I, Smalley SJ, Zhu DWX, et al. Sudden cardiac arrest in apical hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. BMJ Case Reports. 2009;doi:10.1136/bcr.04.2009.17
The development of the hypertrophy is characteristically age-related. While early work had suggested
that individuals generally developed hypertrophy during adolescence, there is increasing recognition
of the development of late-onset disease. In light of this, clinically unaffected adolescent and adult
family members should be offered screening in accordance with current guidelines.[7] [8] [9] European
Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines provide healthcare professionals with a practical diagnostic
and treatment framework for patients of all ages.[7] [8] The guidelines also consider the implications of
a diagnosis for families.
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Theory
• The hypertrophy is often asymmetrical, but it is important to recognize that the hypertrophy can affect
any part of the myocardium. Diastolic dysfunction is often present. Up to one-third of patients have
resting left ventricular outflow obstruction, while others may have exercise or other hemodynamic
strain-induced outflow gradients.
• Atrial arrhythmias are common, and affected individuals have a high risk of thromboembolism.[10]
• Approximately 8% of individuals will develop left ventricular systolic dysfunction.[11] 
• The diagnosis is usually made using a combination of ECG and cardiac imaging, most commonly
echocardiography initially.[8] [12][13] [14] Additional investigations (ambulatory monitoring, exercise
stress test) might be appropriate for risk stratification of patients with HCM.[15] These investigations
are particularly relevant in individuals with any of the following risk factors: previous cardiac arrest
or sustained ventricular tachycardia, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, extreme left ventricular
hypertrophy (>30 mm), unexplained syncope, abnormal blood pressure response to exercise, family
history of sudden death, and significant left ventricular outflow tract obstruction.[16] [17] [18] [19]
• Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is increasingly being used, as it provides accurate
estimation of the extent of hypertrophy, and myocardial fibrosis can be detected as late gadolinium
enhancement (LGE).[13] [20] Studies have shown that the extent of LGE is suggestive of an
increased risk of sudden cardiac death but is not an independent predictor of this. LGE is associated
with an increased incidence of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia.[21] US investigators have
observed that the presence of late gadolinium may allow for better selection of individuals requiring
primary preventative defibrillators.[22] US guidelines recommend cardiac MRI as a complementary
investigation following echocardiography, or as an alternative to echocardiography for those patients in
whom the echocardiogram is inconclusive.[9] ESC guidelines advise assessing patients with HCM with
cardiac MRI and that the presence and extent of LGE may be considered when counseling patients
about their risk of sudden death.[8]
• An ESC risk prediction model, known as HCM Risk-SCD, has been developed and validated to provide
an individualized estimate of 5-year risk of sudden cardiac death.[23]  [ESC: HCM Risk-SCD] (http://
doc2do.com/hcm/webHCM.html)
• Coronary angiography may need to be undertaken to exclude concomitant coronary artery disease in
patients over 40 years of age or who have other coronary risk factors, in particular if they present with
typical symptoms of angina or dyspnea. While myocardial disarray is the pathologic hallmark of HCM,
endomyocardial biopsy is rarely used as myocardial disarray is often patchy and a small amount of
disarray may be found in normal individuals.
• The role of genetic testing is beyond the scope of this topic but, traditionally, HCM has been reported
to be a sarcomeric disease with mutations reported in genes encoding many sarcomeric proteins,
including: beta-myosin heavy chain, myosin binding protein C, troponin T, troponin I, and actin. Other
nonsarcomeric genes include PRKAG2 (often associated with pre-excitation) and rarely LAMP-2
(Danon disease).[24] It is important to recognize that there are many other conditions that may present
with an HCM phenotype. Such conditions include a range of syndromic conditions such as Fabry
disease (particularly in males presenting over the age of 35 years with concentric hypertrophy),
Noonan/Leopard syndromes, and Friedreich ataxia, as well as various other metabolic disorders,
mitochondrial diseases, and glycogen storage diseases.[25] [26] [27] Diagnosis of these conditions
requires a high index of clinical suspicion and the use of appropriate diagnostic tools.[28] An important
differential diagnosis in young healthy individuals is "athlete's heart." Various factors may be used to
distinguish HCM from athlete's heart; these include: extent of hypertrophy, LV cavity size, extent of left
atrial enlargement, presence of LV outflow tract obstruction, changes in tissue Doppler parameters,
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Theory
THEORY
peak VO2 consumption, levels of N-terminal-pro brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), regression on
cessation of exercise, and genetic testing.[29]
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC)
• Previously known as arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia (ARVC/D).[30]
 Characterized by progressive replacement of myocardium with fibro-fatty material. These changes are
found most commonly in the triangle of dysplasia (right ventricular inflow, outflow, and apex) but are
increasingly recognized in the LV. These include clinical variants in which the degree of left ventricular
involvement is equal to or greater than the severity of right ventricular involvement, termed biventricular
or left-dominant arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy, respectively.[31]
• ARVC represents a wide spectrum of disease, involving both electrophysiologic and functional
abnormalities. Electrophysiologic manifestations range from the most modest of ECG abnormalities to
life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias. Similarly, abnormalities of muscle function range from minor
contractile changes to severe right and left ventricular failure.[32] Patients present with a wide variety
of symptoms ranging from arrhythmias to heart failure to sudden death. In the Veneto region of Italy,
ARVC is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in young individuals.[33]
• Diagnosis of ARVC is difficult and requires use of multiple investigations, including: imaging
with echocardiography/MRI/angiography, ambulatory monitoring and exercise stress to look for
arrhythmias, presence of abnormal resting ECG (T wave abnormalities, delayed conduction in the
right-sided leads, epsilon waves), late potential on signal-averaged ECG, and histopathologic changes
seen on endomyocardial biopsy or at postmortem.
• Autosomal dominant inheritance is the most common pattern, although autosomal recessive variants
(often with hair and skin changes such as in Naxos disease and Carvajal syndrome) are also seen.
Various genes have been implicated - most commonly, desmosomal genes, although there have also
been reports of mutations in the RYR2 and TGF-beta genes.[34]
• The Task Force criteria for the diagnosis of ARVC/D were published in 1994.[35] However, these
criteria have been reported to be too restrictive when dealing with additional family members, so
modified criteria were proposed for these individuals.[36] More recently, further modifications of
the criteria have been proposed, which include MRI assessment of cardiac structure and give
more quantifiable measurements of right ventricular (RV) size and function that are associated with
ARVC.[30] There is limited information on the natural history of the disease, although four stages are
generally recognized.[37]
• Concealed: early, generally asymptomatic phase, although it may present as sudden death.
• Overt electrical disorder: unstable phase with symptomatic arrhythmias, generally left bundle
branch block, and suggestive of RV origin.
• RV failure: phase of progressive deterioration in RV contractile function.
• Biventricular pump failure: phase of progressive biventricular dilatation, which may mimic that
seen in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM).
Ion channelopathies
• Includes long QT syndrome (autosomal dominant or recessive inheritance), Brugada syndrome,
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (autosomal dominant or recessive forms),
short QT syndrome (autosomal dominant inheritance), idiopathic ventricular fibrillation, and sick sinus
syndrome (autosomal dominant inheritance). It is important to note that the Working Group of the
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Theory
European Society of Cardiology does not agree with the inclusion of these channelopathies as part of
the spectrum of cardiomyopathies.[3]
Other primary genetic cardiomyopathies include conduction system disease and mitochondrial myopathies.
Primary cardiomyopathies: mixed
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy: echocardiogram
Tanejal AK, Wong J, Bayliss J. Antipsychotic-drug-induced dilated
cardiomyopathy. BMJ Case Reports. 2009; doi:10.1136/bcr.09.2008.0958
• Characterized by the presence of left ventricular dilatation and systolic dysfunction in the absence
of abnormal loading conditions or significant coronary artery disease. Right ventricular dilatation
is often also present. The prevalence of dilated cardiomyopathy is approximately 1 in 250.[5] [6] It
is estimated that 30% to 40% of cases are familial; autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-
linked, and mitochondrial inheritance patterns have been reported.[6] Familial disease should also
be suspected when there is a family history of sudden death, conduction system disease, or an
associated skeletal myopathy. Genetic testing of these patients is advised because certain mutations
(eg, in the LMNA gene) may indicate a higher risk. Genetic testing of these patients is advised
because certain mutations (eg, in the LMNA gene) may indicate a higher risk.[5]
• The European Society of Cardiology (ESC) has proposed a revised definition that separates dilated
cardiomyopathy into two forms according to imaging parameters: dilated cardiomyopathy and non-
dilated left ventricular cardiomyopathy (NDLVC).[8] [38]
• NDLVC is characterized by nonischemic scarring or fatty replacement of the LV in the absence of
dilatation and may occur with or without global or regional wall motion abnormalities or isolated LV
hypokinesia without scarring that is not explained by abnormal loading conditions or coronary artery
disease.[8] [38]
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Theory
THEORY
• Assessment of patients with suspected NDLVC with ECG, echocardiography and cardiac MRI is
recommended.
• There is significant overlap in the genetic variants implicated in NDLVC with those known to cause both
DCM and ARVC.
• As this category of cardiomyopathy is relatively novel, little is known about the prevalence and
outcomes of this condition. It is felt that genotype strongly influences the risk of sudden death with
high-risk genetic variants including; DSP, FLNC, LMNA, DES and RBM20.[8]
• Several of the sarcomeric genes that have been implicated in the development of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy may also lead to a dilated cardiomyopathy phenotype.[39] Mutations in the lamin
A/C gene may result in a wide variety of different phenotypes, but from a cardiac perspective,
diagnosis of a laminopathy is important as affected individuals have a high risk of progressive
conduction system disease and sudden death.[40] An extensive list of conditions that may lead to
dilated cardiomyopathy has been recognized. One well-known cause is post-myocarditis, which is
often asymptomatic from a patient's perspective. Other causes include: alcohol; chemotherapeutic
agents (anthracyclines, trastuzumab); storage diseases (e.g., hemochromatosis); autoimmune and
systemic disorders; neuromuscular disorders; mitochondrial, metabolic/endocrine (thyroid, diabetes,
acromegaly, pheochromocytoma), and nutritional disorders (in particular, thiamine, selenium and
protein malnutrition problems).[41] If no cause is identified, despite extensive investigation, the term
idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy is applied.
Ischemic cardiomyopathy
• A common consequence of myocardial ischemia leading to cardiac dysfunction. It is important to
note that this is excluded from the classification outlined in the American Heart Association scientific
statement.[1]
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
• A less well-defined cardiomyopathy as its diagnosis is based on establishing the presence of a
restrictive ventricular filling pattern. The European Society of Cardiology Working Group defines
it as: "restrictive physiology in the presence of normal or reduced diastolic volumes, normal or
reduced systolic volumes and normal wall thickness."[3] In many ways, it is a description of the
pathophysiologic state, which may represent various pathologies or cardiomyopathies rather than a
distinct cardiomyopathy.
• It may be idiopathic, familial (has been related to troponin I or desmin mutations, the latter often
in association with a skeletal myopathy), or associated with various systemic disorders, such as
hemochromatosis, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, Fabry disease, carcinoid syndrome, scleroderma,
anthracycline toxicity, or previous radiation. In the pediatric population some rare metabolic syndromes
(Gaucher disease or Hurler syndrome) must be excluded.
• Endocardial pathology (hypereosinophilic syndromes or endomyocardial fibrosis) may also result in
a restrictive cardiomyopathy.[42] Patients may present with symptoms of dyspnea or palpitations,
and these relate to diastolic dysfunction. There is usually an elevated jugular venous pressure. The
ECG is typically abnormal with evidence of biatrial hypertrophy and nonspecific ST-T wave changes.
Cardiac imaging by echocardiography or MRI shows biatrial enlargement with evidence of diastolic
dysfunction, evident on mitral inflow Doppler patterns as well as tissue Doppler signals.
• As it may present in a similar manner to constrictive pericarditis, restrictive cardiomyopathy must be
distinguished from that condition, and this may require cardiac catheterization. Endomyocardial biopsy
may be helpful in selected cases.[43] Diuretics are used for symptomatic control but caution is required
as they may reduce preload and thus be counterproductive. Patients may have complex arrhythmias,
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Theory
including atrial fibrillation, and implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) may be needed for the
management of ventricular tachyarrhythmias.
Primary cardiomyopathies: acquired
Inflammatory myocarditis
• An acquired acute or chronic inflammatory condition affecting the myocardium, which can result
from a large number of causes, including infectious agents, toxins, and drugs. Three phases are
recognized: active, healing, and healed stages. The standard Dallas pathologic criteria require
that an inflammatory infiltrate with or without myocyte necrosis is present on standard histologic
assessment.[44] However, newer criteria have been developed that are based on cell-specific
immunoperoxidase stains for specific antigens.
• There are significant risks associated with endomyocardial biopsy, and this has led to
recommendations based on the likelihood of finding specific diseases.[45] Two scenarios that
describe the most common presentations of fulminant myocarditis and giant-cell myocarditis are: 1)
unexplained new-onset heart failure <2 weeks duration in association with a normal size or dilated LV
and hemodynamic compromise; and 2) unexplained new-onset heart failure of 2 weeks to 3 months
duration in association with a dilated LV and evidence of ventricular arrhythmias or high-degree
atrioventricular block or a failure to respond to usual care within 1 to 2 weeks. Cardiac MRI may
provide an alternative diagnostic tool as studies have shown a good correlation between active regions
of myocarditis and areas of abnormal signal intensity on MRI.[13] 
Takotsubo syndrome
• A condition that is manifest by symptoms and signs of acute myocardial infarction in the absence of
significant coronary artery disease or spasm. (The condition derives its name from the fact that the
heart takes on the appearance of a Japanese octopus fishing pot.)[46] Some authors refer to the
condition as "transient apical ballooning and stress cardiomyopathy."
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Theory
THEORY
Left ventriculogram demonstrating apical ballooning in tako-tsubo cardiomyopathy
Augustine DX, Domanski A, Garg A. The stress of chest pain: a case of tako-
tsubo cardiomyopathy. BMJ Case Reports. 2009; doi:10.1136/bcr.03.2009.1660
• Patients present with chest pain associated with ST elevation, T wave inversion, and mild elevations
in cardiac markers. It is most commonly seen in postmenopausal women, and is usually preceded by
some form of significant emotional or physical stress.[47] During the acute event, transient elevations
in norepinephrine levels have been recorded (in the absence of a pheochromocytoma). If the patient
survives the acute event, left ventricular function usually normalizes over a period of several weeks.
• Various groups have proposed diagnostic criteria. The most widely used are those from a group
working at the Mayo Clinic (diagnostic criteria initially reported in 2004 and then modified in 2008):[46]
• Transient hypokinesis, akinesis or dyskinesis of the left ventricular midsegments with or without
apical involvement; the regional wall abnormalities extend beyond a single epicardial vascular
distribution; a stressful trigger is often but not always present
• Absence of obstructive coronary disease or angiographic evidence of acute plaque rupture
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Theory
• New ECG abnormalities (ST elevation and/or T wave inversion) or modest elevation in cardiac
troponin
• Absence of pheochromocytoma/myocarditis.
Peripartum
• Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM), as defined by The Working Group on PPCM of the European
Society of Cardiology, is an idiopathic cardiomyopathy frequently presenting with heart failure
secondary to LV systolic dysfunction (LVEF <45%), towards the end of pregnancy or in the months
following delivery, where no other cause of heart failure is found.[48] [49] It is uncommon, occurring in
approximately 1 in 4000 births.[50] Reports suggest it is more common in women over the gae of 30
and there is an association with gestational hypertension, and twin pregnancy. PPCM appears to be
much more common in women of African-American descent with a low incidence in Hispanic women.
Some patients present in early pregnancy, and have been classified as having early pregnancy-
associated cardiomyopathy.[51]
• Several mechanisms (such as myocarditis, immunologic, and hemodynamic causes) have been
proposed. The condition may be associated with complete recovery in up to 50% of cases, while in
others it may progress to severe heart failure resulting in cardiac transplantation or death. It appears
to carry significant morbidity.[52] Oxidative stress and the generation of a cardiotoxic subfragment of
prolactin may play key roles in the pathophysiology of PPCM. As such, pharmacological blockade of
prolactin offers the possibility of a disease-specific therapy.[48]
Tachycardia-induced
• In certain individuals, prolonged periods of fast heart rate associated with atrial tachycardia, atrial
fibrillation, or ventricular arrhythmias may lead to a tachycardia-related cardiomyopathy.[53] This is an
important condition to recognize as the cardiomyopathy may be reversible when rate control has been
achieved.[54]
Secondary causes of cardiomyopathy
Secondary cardiomyopathies demonstrate myocardial involvement in the context of generalized, systemic
(multiorgan) disorders.[1]
Infiltrative or storage diseases often result in cardiomyopathy, and causes include the following.
• Amyloidosis (hypertrophic or restrictive): characterized by the deposition of amyloid fibrils in the
heart and includes a wide spectrum of disease, including primary amyloidosis, familial amyloid
polyneuropathy, and senile cardiac amyloidosis.[55] Characteristically, patients present with symptoms
and signs of heart failure or rhythm disturbances.[56] [57] The diagnosis may be suspected when
patients have had an ECG or echocardiogram undertaken as part of an initial cardiac workup. The
ECG is characterized by the presence of small QRS voltages, a pseudo-infarction pattern in the
anterior or inferior leads, and ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias. The echocardiogram is
notable for increased thickening of the atrial septum and left ventricular wall; increased myocardial
echogenicity (speckled), associated with some valve thickening; and often a small pericardial effusion.
One of the hallmarks of the condition is the inverse relationship between LV mass on cardiac imaging
and ECG voltage.[56] [58] Increasingly, cardiac MRI is used as a diagnostic tool.[8] [13] [56][59] MRI
reveals a diffuse decrease in the T1 and T2 signal of the myocardium, corresponding with amyloid
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Theory
THEORY
infiltration, and a characteristic appearance of global subendocardial LGE. Biopsy of an affected tissue
often provides histologic confirmation.[56] [58]
• Gaucher disease (restrictive).
• Mucopolysaccharidoses (Hunter syndrome and Hurler disease; mainly dilated cardiomyopathy).[60]
• Hemochromatosis (dilated or restrictive cardiomyopathy): classical hemochromatosis is an autosomal
recessive disease associated with a mutation of the HFE gene, which leads to iron overload. It is
a multisystem disorder, in which cardiac involvement is manifest by the development of a dilated
cardiomyopathy leading to heart failure and conduction system disorder.[57] Treatment with iron
depletion may reverse early changes. Cardiac involvement and detection of iron is easily achieved by
cardiac MRI.[8] [13]
• Fabry disease (hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy).
• Pompe disease (glycogen storage disease type 2; hypertrophic cardiomyopathy).
• Niemann-Pick disease (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy).
• Iron overload states, including thalassemia.
Several toxins are associated with the development of cardiomyopathy.
• There is a strong correlation between doxorubicin and the development of cardiomyopathy.[61]
Cardiomyopathy may also occur as a result of trastuzumab therapy.[62]
• Chronic alcohol consumption may damage myocardial tissue directly by inducing apoptosis, or may
be associated with thiamine deficiency and the development of wet beriberi (although the exact
mechanism is not known).[63]
• Cobalt added to beer and exposure to certain chemicals such as heavy metals may also cause
myocardial damage.[64]
Endocrine disorders are known to be associated with cardiomyopathy, although evidence is limited to case
reports, and the resulting cardiomyopathy can be dilated or restrictive.
• Diabetes mellitus may cause an infiltrative/restrictive cardiomyopathy due to glycosylation of the
myocardium and subsequent diastolic dysfunction.[65] It is important to exclude associated coronary
heart disease in patients with diabetes mellitus who present with a suspected cardiomyopathy.
• Cardiomyopathy can also be caused by hyperthyroidism/hypothyroidism, hyperparathyroidism,
pheochromocytoma, and acromegaly.
Cardiomyopathies are a recognized feature of certain cardiofacial syndromes.
• Noonan syndrome.
• Lentiginosis.[26]
Nutritional deficiencies of various vitamins and minerals have been associated with the development of
cardiomyopathy.
• Thiamine deficiency causes high-output heart failure known as wet beriberi. Many pathophysiologic
mechanisms have been proposed, but it is thought that initial mitochondrial injury may subsequently
lead to cardiomyopathy.[66]
• Other nutritional deficiencies involving vitamin C, niacin, selenium, and vitamin D may also cause
cardiomyopathy.
Other causes
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Theory
• Neuromuscular and neurologic disorders such as Friedreich ataxia, muscular dystrophies (Duchenne,
Becker, and Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy; myotonic dystrophy) can present with cardiac
involvement.
• Autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus.
• Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disorder of unknown cause. Overt cardiac involvement is
uncommon, and patients may present with heart failure (due to development of cardiomyopathy),
bradyarrhythmias/high grade atrioventricular block, or ventricular tachyarrhythmias leading to
sudden death.[67] Subclinical myocardial involvement is common, and cardiac involvement is
often only identified only at autopsy. Granulomatous involvement is often patchy and the yield from
endomyocardial biopsy relatively low. Various diagnostic criteria have been developed.[68] Patients
with cardiac sarcoidosis and symptoms of syncope should have aggressive investigation and be
considered for device-based therapy, including ICD. Cardiac MRI is increasingly being used as a
useful imaging technique and FDG-PET scanning can be useful for both the identification of cardiac
sarcoidosis and for monitoring disease activity.[13] [69] [70] [71] [72] Referral to other specialists may
be necessary for immunosuppressive treatment of the underlying condition.
• Electrolyte imbalance: commonly potassium, phosphate, or magnesium.
• Endomyocardial fibrosis.
• Loeffler endocarditis/hypereosinophilic syndrome.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Emergencies
EMERGENCIES
Urgent considerations
(See  Differentials  for more details)
Cardiac ischemia
The presentation of new-onset heart failure with dyspnea and chest pain should alert the physician to
ischemia as a possible cause. Investigations include an ECG, and measurement of cardiac markers (e.g.,
troponins).[73] [74]
Treatment should address immediate coronary reperfusion with either thrombolytic therapy or primary
percutaneous coronary intervention to restore coronary blood flow. In addition, the implantation of an intra-
aortic balloon may be warranted for immediate stabilization. Heart failure is a common consequence of
myocardial ischemia, and requires emergency evaluation and intervention; however, it is important to note
that the term "ischemic cardiomyopathy" is no longer recommended by the authors of the American Heart
Association scientific statement.[1]
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Initial presentation may be with syncope or sudden cardiac death, thus highlighting the importance of early
diagnosis and screening of first-degree relatives. Physical exam may reveal an outflow murmur similar to
aortic stenosis, which may be differentiated by Valsalva, handgrip, and squatting maneuvers. Treatment
involves avoidance of diuresis, which is in contrast to the management of other cardiomyopathies. In
addition, beta-blockers and/or calcium channel blockers are indicated and strenuous exercise prohibited
(aimed at preventing sudden death). Antiarrhythmic agents and devices may be required in patients with
serious cardiac arrhythmias or multiple risk factors for sudden death. See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy .
Sudden death in young individuals (<40 years)
Sudden cardiac death is of major public health importance.[75] However, most of these sudden deaths occur
in older individuals and are secondary to coronary heart disease. The sudden, unexpected cardiac death
of a young individual has profound effects not only for the family and friends but also for society in general.
Accurate figures are not available but it has been estimated that the incidence of sudden death in young
individuals is about 1 in 100,000 per year.[76] [77]
Common causes of sudden cardiac death include various types of cardiomyopathies and channelopathies,
as well as atherosclerotic coronary artery disease, aortic dissection, and anomalous coronary arteries.
Inherited cardiomyopathies are a significant cause of sudden cardiac death across all age groups. Individuals
with inherited cardiomyopathies are frequently asymptomatic and may only be diagnosed incidentally or
following family screening.[5]
In up to 31% of cases of sudden cardiac death, no structural abnormality can be detected at postmortem.[78]
In many cases a definitive diagnosis is not established at postmortem, despite there being a clear hereditary
basis. Although it may be diagnostically challenging, it is very important to try to establish an accurate cause
of death. Therefore, clinical investigation, and where indicated, genetic testing, of surviving family members
is warranted.[5]
Myocarditis
Two scenarios describe the most common presentations of fulminant myocarditis and giant-cell myocarditis:
[45]
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Emergencies
• Unexplained new-onset heart failure <2 weeks duration in association with a normal size or dilated left
ventricle (LV) and haemodynamic compromise
• Unexplained new-onset heart failure of 2 weeks to 3 months duration in association with a dilated LV
and evidence of ventricular arrhythmias or high-degree atrioventricular block or a failure to respond to
usual care within 1 to 2 weeks.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may provide an additional diagnostic tool as studies have shown
a good correlation between active regions of myocarditis and areas of abnormal signal intensity on MRI.[13]
After establishing a diagnosis, patients with myocarditis require treatment of the systolic dysfunction (using
standard heart failure treatments) and associated arrhythmic complications, which include strategies to
manage both brady- and tachyarrhythmias. If the patient develops hemodynamic compromise, insertion
of an intra-aortic balloon pump or use of a ventricular assist device may be required. Discussion with a
cardiac center that offers mechanical support and/or transplantation should take place at an early stage.
The evidence base for use of specific antiviral therapies and/or immunosuppression is very limited. However,
patients with giant cell myocarditis and eosinophilic myocarditis generally respond to immunosuppression,
and this is one of the major reasons for undertaking endomyocardial biopsy in certain patient subsets. If in
doubt, advice from experts in the management of myocarditis should be sought.[44] [45] See Myocarditis .
EMERGENCIES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Approach
Cardiomyopathy is diagnosed by taking an accurate clinical history, including family history (3-generational
pedigree) and clinical examination, followed by appropriate investigations. Laboratory findings vary
depending on specific the etiology. A 12 lead ECG and echocardiogram will detect most cardiomyopathies.
Further evaluation may include more complex ECG testing, additional imaging (e.g., chest radiography,
cardiac MRI, cardiac CT), cardiac catheterization, endomyocardial biopsy, and genetic testing.[5] These tests
are often nonspecific, pointing only to the pathophysiologic consequences of cardiomyopathy rather than its
specific etiology. A combination of all these modalities is typically required to determine the etiology, as no
single available test is usually specific enough to determine the cause. 
History
The clinical history is a critical component in the diagnosis of cardiomyopathies. Emphasis should be placed
on risk factors for specific causes. Medical illnesses, family history, and alcohol and drug exposure may
predispose to the development of cardiomyopathies.
History of present illness
• The most common symptoms associated with cardiomyopathy are dyspnea, chest discomfort,
palpitations, and syncope.
• Patients with concerning cardiac symptoms such as exertional chest pain, syncope, sustained
palpitations, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and those with a family history of
cardiomyopathy or premature cardiac death should be referred for specialist investigation.[5]
Medical history
• History of coronary artery disease (CAD) and subsequent cardiac ischemia should be excluded.
• History of any causes of secondary cardiomyopathies should be addressed, including infiltrative,
storage, toxic, endomyocardial, inflammatory, endocrine, cardiofacial, and neuromuscular/neurologic
causes; nutritional deficiencies; autoimmune or collagen diseases; electrolyte imbalance; and
exposure to chemotherapeutic agents.[1]
Family history
• Family history of premature cardiac death or arrhythmia may indicate risk of primary cardiomyopathy.
Specific questions may elucidate hereditary causes of secondary cardiomyopathy including infiltrative
diseases (familial autosomal dominant amyloidosis, Gaucher, Hunter, Hurler), storage diseases (Fabry,
glycogen storage, Niemann-Pick), Noonan syndrome, lentiginosis, Friedreich ataxia, Duchenne/Becker
muscular dystrophy, Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, neurofibromatosis, and
tuberous sclerosis.[1]
Physical exam
No specific physical examination findings are consistent with a particular cause; the examination is directed
towards seeking signs of cardiac dysfunction. A sustained prominent apical impulse on palpation may
suggest left ventricular hypertrophy. A diffusely palpable cardiac impulse with apical displacement may be
seen with ventricular dilatation. Auscultation of the heart may reveal murmurs, an S4 gallop (heard in types
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
of cardiomyopathy that involve increased left ventricular pressure) or an S3 gallop (heard when there is
increased left ventricular volume).
Auscultation of the lungs may demonstrate crackles, indicating pulmonary congestion. Pedal and leg edema,
and jugular venous distension, may also be present in certain cardiomyopathies. Specialist referral is
indicated if any of the following features are present: an ejection systolic murmur (in left ventricular outflow
tract obstruction, as seen in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, this increases in intensity with the Valsalva
manoeuvre and is diminished by squatting); peripheral and/or pulmonary edema; elevated jugular venous
pressure; an irregular pulse.[5]
Initial tests
An ECG, although commonly nonspecific, may show abnormalities that point to an individual etiology. A
normal ECG has, approximately, a 98% negative predictive value when systolic dysfunction is suspected.[79]
Initial laboratory tests should include baseline blood tests such as CBC, metabolic panel, and thyroid function
in all patients to exclude contributory or exacerbating factors. A B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) provides
supporting data in patients with dyspnea. Patients presenting with chest pain require measurement of cardiac
markers including troponins. In addition, a chest x-ray is recommended.
Echocardiogram, other imaging, and cardiac catheterization
Echocardiography is an extremely useful and noninvasive diagnostic tool.[13] An echocardiogram helps to
distinguish the cardiomyopathies with respect to pathophysiology. It can differentiate between hypertrophic,
restrictive, or dilated cardiomyopathies in most cases. It may suggest a diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right
ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) or athlete's heart. The British Society of Echocardiography has outlined
recommendations for assessment and diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy by echocardiogram.[80]
Cardiac MRI is a useful method for uncovering the etiology of cardiomyopathy because it provides excellent
contrast and spatial resolution of the heart. It is also noninvasive, readily available, and not operator-
dependent. MRI can be used to assess ventricular end-diastolic volumes, presence of intracardiac thrombi,
stroke volume, ejection fraction, and valvular pathology. MRI also provides information on whether there is
fibrosis or scar present in the cardiac muscle, which is seen as late gadolinium enhancement, and this helps
with diagnosis and risk assessment in many cardiomyopathies.[8] [81] Cardiac CT is particularly helpful in
the assessment of possible concomitant coronary artery disease.[13] Multimodality imaging can be used to
aid diagnosis and guide management in the majority of cardiomyopathies.[14]
Cardiac catheterization can be a useful additional test in some cases. Ventricular and atrial pressures are
measured, which allow for the calculation of pressure gradients across cardiac valves and the left ventricular
outflow tract. Catheterization of the heart allows for ventriculography to be performed. Ejection fraction,
ventricular size and wall motion, and left ventricular outflow tract size can be estimated, and the presence of
valvular regurgitation can be evaluated. Additionally, coronary angiography can be performed to evaluate for
coronary arterial disease as a cause of ischemia.
It is very important to distinguish restrictive cardiomyopathy from constrictive pericarditis, as pericardiectomy
is indicated for constrictive pericarditis. Tests including echocardiography, cardiac MRI, and cardiac
catheterization are helpful in distinguishing between these two conditions.[82]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Endomyocardial biopsy
In very rare circumstances, an endomyocardial biopsy is needed to help differentiate disease processes
and guide therapy. It may be useful in the diagnosis of certain types of cardiomyopathy (e.g., infiltrative), in
particular where there has been a recent onset of severe heart failure.[45]
Specialized testing
Testing may be directed towards excluding possible causes of cardiomyopathy.
• Many novel genes are reported to cause cardiomyopathy, and the genetic evaluation of
cardiomyopathy is becoming more feasible because of increasing availability of high-throughput gene
sequencing technologies.[83] Genetic testing may be indicated to identify abnormalities in patients
with conduction system disorders, lysosomal storage diseases, or Noonan syndrome. Mitochondrial
disorders may result from mutations in either mitochondrial DNA or nuclear DNA, and the inheritance
pattern will therefore vary depending on location of the mutation.[84]
• Serologies (e.g., Lyme, HIV, parvovirus) may indicate a cause of myocarditis.
• Liver function tests and a coagulation profile: may indicate dysfunction in alcohol-related
cardiomyopathy or hemochromatosis.
• Electrophysiologic studies may be required for conduction system disorders or Brugada syndrome.
A drug provocation test using a sodium channel blocker may unmask ECG findings in these
syndromes.[85]
• Exercise tolerance testing, ambulatory monitoring, or signal-averaged ECG may help diagnose ARVC.
• Serum iron studies may indicate systemic iron overload (hemochromatosis) or deficiency (anemia).
Levels of vitamins or selenium may be low in systemic deficiencies.
• Alpha-galactosidase A levels are low in Fabry disease. These levels can be normal in affected females
due to the sex-linked inheritance pattern of the disease. Therefore, genetic testing may be necessary
in females if there is clinical suspicion of Fabry’s disease.
• Endocrinologic tests are required for suspected diabetes mellitus (elevated fasting blood sugar and/or
HbA1c); thyroid dysfunction (abnormal thyroid-stimulating hormone and levels of thyroid hormones);
or acromegaly (high insulin-like growth factor-1 and lack of glucose suppression of growth hormone
levels).
• Serum antinuclear antibodies are usually positive in systemic lupus erythematosus.
• A trial of thiamine is indicated for suspected deficiency (wet beriberi).
• Muscle biopsy may be used for diagnosis of mitochondrial diseases.
• Serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) or tissue (e.g., rectal) biopsy may indicated for suspected
amyloidosis.
• Pulmonary function testing, lung or lymph node biopsy (noncaseating granulomas), and measurement
of angiotensin-converting enzyme (high) may support a diagnosis of sarcoid.
• Nuclear imaging modalities (positron emission tomography [PET]; single photon emission computed
tomography [SPECT]) may be considered for the evaluation of specific infiltrative cardiomyopathies,
including cardiac sarcoidosis.[59]
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Differentials overview
Common
Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
Myocarditis
Alcohol: dilated cardiomyopathy
Uncommon
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
Idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC)
Brugada syndrome and other ion channelopathies
Conduction system disease
Mitochondrial disorders
Takotsubo syndrome
Peripartum: dilated cardiomyopathy
Tachycardia-induced: dilated cardiomyopathy
Amyloidosis: hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy
Hemochromatosis: restrictive or dilated cardiomyopathy
Fabry disease: hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy
Other lysosomal storage disease
Doxorubicin: dilated cardiomyopathy
Heavy metals/chemicals: dilated cardiomyopathy
Diabetes mellitus
Thyroid dysfunction: dilated cardiomyopathy
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Acromegaly: hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy
Noonan syndrome: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Lentiginosis: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Thiamine deficiency (wet beriberi): dilated cardiomyopathy
Friedreich ataxia/muscular dystrophy: hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy
Deficiency of iron, niacin, selenium, or vitamin D: dilated cardiomyopathy
Systemic lupus erythematosus: dilated cardiomyopathy
Endomyocardial fibrosis/Loeffler endocarditis (hypereosinophilic syndrome)
Sarcoidosis
Electrolyte disorders
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Differentials
Common
◊ Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
symptoms of cardiac
failure (shortness of
breath on exertion,
orthopnea, fatigue,
chest pain or pressure,
paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea, abdominal
discomfort, leg
swelling), family history
of cardiomyopathy
signs of cardiac failure
(S3 gallop during rapid
ventricular phase of
diastole may indicate
ventricular dilatation;
jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, basal crackles
on lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly)
»ECG: often
nonspecific findings;
low limb lead voltage
along with precordial
criteria for left
ventricular hypertrophy,
and a wide QRS
complex/left bundle
branch block seen
in idiopathic dilated
cardiomyopathy; P
wave abnormalities
indicating atrial
enlargement
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
normal or decreased
wall thickness; poor
wall thickening in
systole; left ventricular
dilatation in a spherical
pattern; poor systolic
function with diminished
stroke volume and
low ejection fraction;
4-chamber cardiac
enlargement
»CBC: low Hb or
hematocrit levels in
anemia
Anemia may be
associated with chronic
heart failure or rarely
»cardiac MRI: findings
may suggest an
alternate cause for the
cardiomyopathy
MRI with contrast
can be used to
exclude underlying
inflammatory or atypical
causes of dilated
cardiomyopathy.
Ischemic causes of
dilatation represented
by transmural or near
transmural myocardial
scarring of the left
ventricle, segmental
areas of wall thinning
and hypokinesis.
Infectious causes
represented by
inflammatory MRI
changes. Global
myocardial contractile
dysfunction more
commonly seen in
dilated cardiomyopathy
than with ischemic
origin of cardiac
dysfunction.
»cardiac
catheterization:
increased
ventricular size on
ventriculography; global
wall motion defect
»endomyocardial
biopsy: myriad
pathologic findings may
be seen if there is an
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Common
◊ Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
indicate high-output
heart failure states.
»B-type natriuretic
peptide: elevated in
heart failure
Readily available test
for heart failure. Not
specific to any type of
cardiomyopathy.
Elevated levels (refer
to local laboratory
values adjusted for
age, renal function)
are consistent with
cardiac dysfunction.
Normal levels have
high negative predictive
value.
alternate cause for the
cardiomyopathy
Used to exclude
underlying causes
such as myocarditis or
amyloidosis.
Myocarditis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of recent or
known infection,
which may be viral
(e.g., coxsackievirus,
cytomegalovirus
(CMV), herpes,
adenovirus, parvovirus,
HIV, severe acute
respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 [SARS-
CoV-2]), bacterial
(meningococcus,
psittacosis,
streptococcal),
rickettsial (typhus,
Rocky Mountain
spotted fever), fungal
(e.g., aspergillosis,
candidiasis), or
parasitic; history of
recent drug use (e.g.,
signs related to
underlying cause,
plus signs of cardiac
failure (jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, basal crackles
on lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly) and/or
tachyarrhythmias, and/
or cardiogenic shock
»ECG: ST-T
changes, ventricular
tachyarrhythmias
»echocardiogram:
left ventricular dilatation
and/or segmental wall
motion abnormalities
»serology: may be
positive for infective
organism (e.g.,
parvovirus, HIV, Lyme)
»cardiac MRI:
may show areas
of abnormal signal
intensity in regions of
active myocarditis
»endomyocardial
biopsy: may
be positive for
CMV, adenovirus,
coxsackievirus,
parvovirus, or human
herpes virus
Diagnostic yield may be
increased by molecular
analysis with DNA-RNA
extraction and PCR
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Common
Myocarditis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
cocaine, sulfonamides,
anticonvulsants) or
vaccination with SARS-
CoV-2 mRNA vaccine;
chest pain, exertional
dyspnea, fatigue,
syncope, or palpitations
amplification of the viral
genome.[1]
◊ Alcohol: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of excessive
alcohol consumption,
may be diagnosed as
idiopathic if alcohol
history is not apparent
signs of liver disease
(spider naevi,
clubbing, jaundice,
hepatomegaly); signs
of cardiac failure due
to systolic dysfunction
(jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, basal crackles
on lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly)
»ECG: nonspecific ST-
T wave changes, atrial
fibrillation
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
normal or decreased
wall thickness; poor
wall thickening in
systole; left ventricular
dilatation in a
spherical pattern;
diminished stroke
volume on Doppler
echocardiography, with
low ejection fraction;
4-chamber cardiac
enlargement
»liver function tests:
may be elevated,
particularly gamma-
glutamyl transferase
»serum albumin:
low albumin if hepatic
synthetic function
impaired
»coagulation profile:
may be abnormal
if hepatic synthetic
function impaired
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
often presents
during adolescence;
sudden cardiac death
can be presenting
sign; dyspnea most
common symptom;
lightheadedness,
presyncope or syncope,
angina, palpitations;
family history of sudden
cardiac death or
diagnosed HCM
late systolic murmur at
the left sternal border,
with a crescendo-
decrescendo pattern
at the apex and
left sternal border;
holosystolic murmur
of mitral regurgitation
may be heard at apex;
jugular venous pulse
with prominent "a"
wave; S4 gallop
»ECG: left ventricular
hypertrophy often
present; pathologic
Q waves and ST-
T wave changes
common; P wave
abnormalities indicating
atrial enlargement
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
»echocardiogram:
hallmark sign is left
ventricular hypertrophy;
there may be evidence
of delayed ventricular
relaxation pattern/
diastolic dysfunction;
systolic dysfunction
representing end-stage
disease may develop;
left atrial enlargement;
aortic valve notching
Signs to differentiate
hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM)
from aortic stenosis:
1) asymmetric septal
hypertrophy usually
seen in primary HCM;
2) outflow obstruction
present in about 30%
of patients at rest and
up to 70% of patients
with provocation from
Valsalva or squat-
to-stand maneuver;
3) increased left
ventricular wall
thickness ≥15 mm
not associated with
systemic hypertension;
and 4) increased
outflow obstruction
post-premature
»cardiac MRI: apical
or other localized
areas of hypertrophy
may be more readily
seen on cardiac MRI
than on conventional
echocardiography;
functional cardiac
MRI may be used to
assess left ventricular
outflow tract obstruction
(LVOT), thickness of
septum and presence
of anterior motion of
mitral valve during
systole, as well as
extent of fibrosis
on late gadolinium
enhancement
»cardiac
catheterization:
LVOT; pull-back
catheterization
may be used to
assess pressure
gradient between
apex and aorta;
falsely elevated left
ventricular pressures
may be seen due to
entrapment of the
catheter during systole;
Brockenbrough-
Braunwald-Morrow sign
The Brockenbrough-
Braunwald-Morrow sign
is a phenomenon that
may be observed in
patients with outflow
obstruction secondary
to hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM),
and can be used to
differentiate HCM from
aortic stenosis; seen
by measuring pre-
and post-premature
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
ventricular contraction
(PVC) or Valsalva
maneuver.[86] [87] [88]
Apical hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy:
4-chamber
echocardiographic
view with contrast
Ahmed I, Smalley
SJ, Zhu DWX,
et al. Sudden
cardiac arrest in
apical hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.
BMJ Case Reports.
2009;doi:10.1136/
bcr.04.2009.17
ventricular contraction
(PVC) pressure
dynamics in the
ascending aorta and
left ventricular outflow
tract (LVOT).
HCM: post-PVC
increased left
ventricular pressure
and decreased
ascending aortic
pressure with an
increase in LVOT
gradient, occurs
because degree of
obstruction increases
during the more forceful
post-PVC beat.
Aortic stenosis: post-
PVC increased left
ventricular pressure
and increased
ascending aortic
pressure. More forceful
post-PVC beat exerts
pressure on a fixed
stenotic valve.
»endomyocardial
biopsy (more
commonly done at
autopsy in the case
of a sudden death):
myocardial hypertrophy
and disorganization
of muscle bundles
in a whorled pattern;
diffuse fibrosis of the
walls of the heart, with
somewhat increased
fibrosis observed
in intraventricular
septum; intramural
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
coronary artery arterial
wall thickening and
decreased lumen size
may be seen
Endomyocardial biopsy
is rarely performed as
myocardial disarray is
usually present in a
patchy distribution.[89]
[90]
◊ Idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
may be asymptomatic
or present with
symptoms of cardiac
failure (shortness of
breath on exertion,
orthopnea, fatigue,
chest pain or pressure,
paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea, abdominal
discomfort, leg
swelling); family history
of cardiomyopathy
may have signs of heart
failure (jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, basal crackles
on lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly)
»ECG: findings
may suggest a
secondary cause for
the cardiomyopathy
Infiltrative processes
may be evident with
a loss of precordial
R wave progression
in leads V1-V6,
representing a
pseudoinfarction
pattern, and low limb
lead voltage.
»CXR: findings
may suggest a
secondary cause for
the cardiomyopathy
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
Bilateral hilar or
mediastinal or lymph
node enlargement
suggests a secondary
»cardiac MRI: useful
in distinguishing
between constrictive
pericarditis
and restrictive
cardiomyopathy; in
constrictive pericarditis
the pericardium
may appear to be
calcified or thickened,
which is not typically
present in restrictive
cardiomyopathy
Findings may
suggest a secondary
cause for the
cardiomyopathy, such
as iron depositions in
subepicardial regions
in hemochromatosis;
myocardial infiltration
with amyloid protein
in amyloidosis; or
inflammatory changes
in sarcoidosis.[59]
»cardiac
catheterization:
similar hemodynamic
findings to constrictive
pericarditis, but higher
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
cause such as
sarcoidosis.
»echocardiogram:
normal or small
reduction in left
ventricular diastolic
diameter; biatrial
enlargement; restrictive
diastolic dysfunction;
normal appearance of
pericardium
It is very important to
distinguish restrictive
cardiomyopathy from
constrictive pericarditis,
as pericardiectomy
is indicated for
constrictive pericarditis.
Tests including
echocardiography,
cardiac MRI, and
cardiac catheterization
are helpful in
distinguishing
between these two
conditions.[82]
»B-type natriuretic
peptide: elevated
Readily available test
for heart failure. Not
specific to any type of
cardiomyopathy.
Elevated levels
consistent with cardiac
dysfunction. Normal
levels have high
negative predictive
value.
left ventricular than
right ventricular filling
pressures are more
suggestive of restrictive
cardiomyopathy when
the diagnosis is in
question.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
male predominance;
first presentation often
in adolescence; family
history of sudden
cardiac death or ARVC;
chest pain, palpitations,
dizziness, fatigue,
dyspnea, syncope, or
sudden cardiac death
after physical exertion
may be normal; S3,
S4, or split S2 may be
present
»ECG: may have
abnormal repolarization
with T wave inversion
present in leads V1-V3;
an epsilon wave (small
amplitude potentials
at end of QRS);
ventricular ectopy or
recurrent monomorphic
ventricular tachycardia
with left bundle branch
block pattern
»echocardiogram:
right ventricular
dilatation; aneurysmal
projections from right
ventricular wall
»B-type natriuretic
peptide: elevated
Readily available test
for heart failure. Not
specific to any type of
cardiomyopathy.
Elevated levels
consistent with cardiac
dysfunction.
»cardiac MRI:
increased signal
intensity of right
ventricular free wall on
T1-weighted images
representing fatty
infiltration; thinning and
akinesis/aneurysms
of right ventricular
free wall/triangle
of dysplasia; left
ventricular involvement
is increasingly
recognized
»cardiac
catheterization:
right ventricular
enlargement; right
ventricular wall motion
abnormalities; normal
coronary artery
anatomy
Previously considered
the definitive test
for diagnosis of
arrhythmogenic
right ventricular
cardiomyopathy
(ARVC) but has largely
been replaced by
MRI.[13] [91] Remains
useful because it
is an avenue for
endomyocardial biopsy
if required.
»endomyocardial
biopsy: fibro-fatty
replacement of
myocardium
May have false
negatives and can
be complicated by
ventricular free wall
rupture.[35] Rarely
done in clinical practice.
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
»exercise stress
test: exercise-
related ventricular
tachyarrhythmias
»ambulatory
monitoring:
spontaneous ventricular
tachyarrhythmias
»signal-averaged
ECG: a late potential
may be present
Brugada syndrome and other ion channelopathies
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
syncope, palpitations,
and cardiac arrest are
common presentations;
Brugada syndrome:
may have family history
of Brugada syndrome
or unexplained
cardiac death, can
be asymptomatic,
may have a history
of febrile illness, illicit
drug or alcohol use,
or use of sodium
channel blockers or
psychotropic drugs
often nonspecific to
causes of syndrome
and unremarkable
arrhythmia; may be an
incidental finding on
ECG
»serum potassium:
normal
Hyperkalemia may
produce ECG findings
similar to Brugada
syndrome; elevated
potassium level must
be excluded.
»ECG: findings
vary with type of
channelopathy
Brugada syndrome
- type 1 Brugada
pattern: coved ST-
segment elevation (J-
point elevation with a
gradual down-sloping
ST-segment) ≥2 mm
with a negative T-wave
in the right precordial
leads.[92] [93][94] [95]
[96]
Long QT syndrome:
prolonged corrected
QT >450 ms (males),
>460 ms (females),
»drug provocation
test with sodium
channel blocker: may
unmask ECG findings
in Brugada syndrome
»electrophysiologic
study: inducible
arrhythmia
»genetic testing for
Brugada syndrome:
positive for known
pathogenic mutation
associated with
Brugada syndrome
(e.g., SCN5A)
»advanced cardiac
imaging (MRI or CT):
in Brugada syndrome,
may demonstrate
cardiac structural
changes, particularly
in the right ventricular
outflow tract
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
Brugada syndrome and other ion channelopathies
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
torsades de pointes, T
wave alternans.
Sick sinus syndrome:
inappropriate sinus
bradycardia, sinus
arrest, sinoatrial block,
sinus node reentrant
tachycardia.
Catecholaminergic
polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia:
bidirectional ventricular
tachycardia with
alternating QRS axis on
exercise, resting ECG
usually normal.
Short QT syndrome:
QT interval <340 ms,
ventricular tachycardia
or fibrillation, peaked
T waves similar to
those produced by
hyperkalemia.
Idiopathic ventricular
fibrillation: ventricular
fibrillation with no
underlying cause.
»echocardiogram:
usually no specific
findings
Useful to rule out other
causes of arrhythmias
and cardiomyopathies.
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Conduction system disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
patients may present
with syncope or sudden
death; there may
be other features of
cardiomyopathy or
structural heart disease
resulting in heart
failure; in some cases,
there may be features
of an associated
neuromuscular disease
exclude associated
neuromuscular
diseases
»ECG: prolonged PR,
QRS, or QT intervals
with evidence of bundle
branch block or high-
grade atrioventricular
block
»ambulatory
monitoring:
evidence of high-grade
atrioventricular block
»electrophysiologic
studies: prolonged HV
intervals may be noted
His bundle (H)
potential to the onset of
ventricular activity (V).
»genetic testing: may
identify causative gene
A wide range of
genes have been
implicated and include
SCN5A, KCNJ2, HCN4,
NKX2.5, LMNA, DMPK,
and PRKAG2.[97]
◊ Mitochondrial disorders
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
present with a wide
range of symptoms
relating to the organ
systems affected;
the more common
conditions, which
may have cardiac
manifestations,
include the Kearns-
Sayre syndrome
and myopathy, lactic
acidosis, and stroke-
like-episodes (MELAS)
syndrome
findings depend on the
specific organ systems
involved
»clinical evaluation:
diagnosis depends on
a high index of clinical
suspicion in patients
with multisystem
involvement, exercise
tolerance that is out of
keeping with cardiac
imaging (e.g., poor
cardiopulmonary
stress testing with
early achievement of
anaerobic threshold),
or an unusual pattern
of inheritance (i.e.,
maternal if there
is a mitochondrial
mutation); tests are
guided by clinical
presentation
»cardiopulmonary
exercise testing:
elevated ventilatory
equivalent for oxygen
(VE/VO2) at peak
exercise
»genetic testing:
results of testing
nuclear and
mitochondrial DNA
(blood, muscle, and/
or other tissues) may
confirm diagnosis
Mitochondrial disorders
may result from
mutations in either
mitochondrial DNA
or nuclear DNA, and
the inheritance pattern
will therefore vary
depending on location
of the mutation.[84]
»echocardiogram:
hypertrophic or dilated
cardiomyopathy
»muscle biopsy: may
help confirm diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Mitochondrial disorders
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Impaired peak oxygen
consumption (VO2)
appears to correlate to
the severity of genetic
mutation.[15]
◊ Takotsubo syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
usually affects older
women; history of
recent physical/
psychological stress,
chest pain, dyspnea;
similar presentation
to anterior myocardial
infarction
may be signs of cardiac
failure (jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, basal crackles
on lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly)
»echocardiogram:
apical ballooning of left
ventricle
»cardiac
catheterization:
normal coronary
vessels
Resembles Japanese
octopus fishing pot.
Left ventriculogram
demonstrating
apical ballooning
in tako-tsubo
cardiomyopathy
Augustine DX,
Domanski A, Garg
A. The stress
of chest pain: a
case of tako-tsubo
cardiomyopathy.
BMJ Case Reports.
2009; doi:10.1136/
bcr.03.2009.1660
»cardiac MRI: may
show apical ballooning
without scarring in
the apical segments,
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Takotsubo syndrome
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
distinguishing this from
left anterior descending
artery territory infarction
◊ Peripartum: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
most common in obese,
multiparous women
>30 years of age, with
preeclampsia, towards
the end of pregnancy or
in the months following
delivery; presents with
fatigue, shortness of
breath
may be signs of cardiac
failure (jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, basal crackles
on lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly)
»ECG: nonspecific ST-
T wave changes or
bundle branch block;
P wave abnormalities
indicating atrial
enlargement
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
normal or decreased
wall thickness; poor
wall thickening in
systole; left ventricular
dilatation in a
spherical pattern;
diminished stroke
volume on Doppler
echocardiography, with
low ejection fraction;
4-chamber cardiac
enlargement
◊ Tachycardia-induced: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of structural
heart disease with
rapid, irregular pulse
rate; features of cardiac
»ECG: evidence
of underlying atrial
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Tachycardia-induced: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
decreased left
ventricular function,
particularly idiopathic
dilated cardiomyopathy
and a tachyarrhythmia;
can affect any age
group including
children; evidence of
underlying cause for
tachyarrhythmia such
as thyrotoxicosis
failure due to systolic
dysfunction (jugular
venous distension,
peripheral edema,
basal crackles on
lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly)
or ventricular
tachyarrhythmias,
which lead to the
condition
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
normal or decreased
wall thickness; poor
wall thickening in
systole; left ventricular
dilatation in a
spherical pattern;
diminished stroke
volume on Doppler
echocardiography, with
low ejection fraction;
4-chamber cardiac
enlargement
Repeat
echocardiogram after
treatment should
demonstrate recovery
of left ventricular
systolic function.
◊ Amyloidosis: hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of and
symptoms of
amyloidosis and
cardiac failure (e.g.,
fatigue, weight loss,
shortness of breath on
signs of cardiac
failure (jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, basal crackles
on lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly),
»ECG: may
show conduction
abnormalities, low QRS
voltage compared with
muscle mass
»serum and
urine protein
electrophoresis with
immunofixation:
monoclonal
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Amyloidosis: hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
exertion, orthopnea,
fatigue, chest pain or
pressure), palpitations,
syncope
arrhythmias; specific
features suggestive
of amyloid include
periorbital purpura and
macroglossia
»echocardiogram:
speckled appearance
of myocardium
(although can occur
in end stage kidney
disease), normal
or small reduction
in left ventricular
ejection fraction; biatrial
enlargement (with right
atrial pressure > 10
mmHg); restrictive
diastolic dysfunction;
interatrial septal and
valvular thickening;
normal appearance
of pericardium, but
presence of effusion
together with other
signs supports
diagnosis; longitudinal
strain quantification
Comprehensive 2D
echocardiography,
including quantitative
tissue Doppler and
speckle-tracking
strain analysis should
be performed in
all patients with a
clinical suspicion of
cardiac amyloidosis
and unexplained
left ventricular wall
thickening.[58] [59]
 Presence of left
ventricular hypertrophy
by imaging with
evidence of low
ECG QRS voltage
is particularly
suggestive.[58]
»B-type natriuretic
peptide: elevated
immunoglobulin light
chain spike
The combination
of serum protein
electrophoresis
with immunofixation
(SPIE), urine protein
electrophoresis with
immunofixation (UPIE),
and quantification of
serum free light-chains
has a sensitivity of 99%
for identifying abnormal
pro-amyloidotic
precursor in light chain
amyloidosis (AL).[56]
[98] Therefore, this
screening test is
highly sensitive for AL
amyloidosis and is very
helpful in suggesting
the diagnosis of cardiac
amyloid when it is
clinically suspected.[56]
[58] If electrophoresis
is negative for light
chains, technetium
pyrophosphate scan
is recommended to
look for transthyretin
cardiac amyloid, the
most common type of
amyloidosis that causes
cardiomyopathy.[99]
[100]
»rectal biopsy:
amyloid on Congo
red stain; for
immunohistology and
genotyping
Pathognomonic
histological property of
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Amyloidosis: hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Readily available test
for heart failure. Not
specific to any type of
cardiomyopathy.
extracellular deposition
of misfolded proteins
after staining with
Congo red and then
viewed under cross
polarized light. This is
a relatively noninvasive
way to confirm the
diagnosis of systemic
amyloid.[56]
»endomyocardial
biopsy: amyloid on
Congo red stain; gold
standard test
»cardiac MRI: diffuse
decrease in T1 and
T2 signal intensity
of the myocardium,
due to infiltration
with amyloid protein;
global sub-endocardial
late gadolinium
enhancement
MRI is useful in
distinguishing between
constrictive pericarditis
and restrictive
cardiomyopathy,
because in the former
the pericardium
may appear to be
calcified or thickened,
which is not typically
present in restrictive
cardiomyopathy.
»bone scan: unique
myocardial uptake
pattern in ATTR
cardiac amyloidosis
by scintigraphy with
99mTechnetium
(Tc)-bisphosphonate
derivatives
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Amyloidosis: hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
When the disease
is suspected, if
monoclonal protein is
undetectable and the
serum free light-chain
ratio is normal, the
specificity of grade 2 or
3 bone cardiac uptake
for cardiac transthyretin
amyloidosis (ATTR) is
almost 100%.[101]
»cardiac
catheterization:
absolute myocardial
blood flow and
coronary flow reserve
are substantially
reduced
Hemodynamic findings
may be similar to
constrictive pericarditis,
but higher left than
right ventricular filling
pressures are more
suggestive of restrictive
cardiomyopathy
(attributable to
cardiac amyloidosis)
when diagnosis is in
question.
»genetic testing:
may demonstrate
transthyretin mutations
◊ Hemochromatosis: restrictive or dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of
hemochromatosis and
related symptoms (e.g.,
fatigue, arthralgias,
sexual dysfunction),
signs of
hemochromatosis (e.g.,
skin bronzing), signs of
cardiac failure (jugular
venous distension,
»ECG: decreased
QRS amplitude and
flattened/inverted T
waves; arrhythmias
»cardiac MRI:
iron depositions in
subepicardial regions
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Hemochromatosis: restrictive or dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
symptoms of cardiac
failure (shortness of
breath on exertion,
orthopnoea, fatigue,
chest pain or pressure,
paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnoea, abdominal
discomfort, leg
swelling), palpitations,
syncope
peripheral edema,
basal crackles on
lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly) and/or
arrhythmias
»echocardiogram:
either signs of mixed
dilated-restrictive or
dilated cardiomyopathy
Cardiac MRI T2-
star is useful for the
early diagnosis of
iron deposition in the
myocardium.[102] [103]
»serum iron studies:
elevated ferritin >200
micrograms/L; elevated
transferrin saturation;
ferritin also acts as an
acute phase reactant
and levels may be
elevated due to other
acute illnesses
Cardiomyopathy
is usually a late
complication of
hemochromatosis.
»liver biopsy:
elevated hepatic iron
concentration
Evaluation for
hemochromatosis.
Cardiomyopathy
is usually a late
complication of
hemochromatosis.
»endomyocardial
biopsy: increased iron
concentration
◊ Fabry disease: hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
rare; symptoms begin
in adolescence, burning
pain in arms and legs,
ocular involvement with
vortex keratopathy,
renal insufficiency and
failure, fatigue; cardiac
predominant variant
rash in swimming-trunk
distribution; cornea
verticillata (whorl-like
epithelial deposits);
anhidrosis
»ECG: frequently
shows left ventricular
hypertrophy with
nonspecific ST-T wave
changes
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
»cardiac MRI: may
show left ventricular
hypertrophy, a
characteristic finding
is late gadolinium
enhancement in the
postero-basal left
ventricular wall
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Fabry disease: hypertrophic or restrictive cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
may present in middle
life
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
may show left
ventricular hypertrophy;
may show binary
appearance to
left ventricular
endocardium
Binary appearance:
echo-bright
endocardium adjacent
to hyporeflective
subendocardial layer.
Not all authors have
found this to be a
reliable feature.[104]
Low myocardial native
T1 typically precedes
the development
of left ventricular
hypertrophy and can be
an early marker of the
disease.[105]
»serum levels of
alpha-galactosidase
A: levels are absent or
low in male patients,
but can be normal in
females
Fabry disease is due
to a deficiency in
alpha-galactosidase
A causing the buildup
of glycolipids and
deposition into organs
such as the heart and
kidney.
DNA analysis will give a
definitive diagnosis.
◊ Other lysosomal storage disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
symptoms vary
depending on the
underlying disorder
(e.g., Gaucher,
Niemann-Pick,
Hunter-Hurler, Pompe
syndromes)
signs variable
depending on the
underlying disorder
(e.g., Gaucher,
Niemann-Pick,
Hunter-Hurler, Pompe
syndromes)
»ECG: findings
vary depending on
presence/absence of
cardiac hypertrophy/
conduction system
disease
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»enzyme and/or
substrate assays:
altered activity or levels,
depending on specific
enzyme deficiency
»genetic testing: may
show mutation
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Other lysosomal storage disease
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
»echocardiogram:
normal or small
reduction in left
ventricular ejection
fraction; biatrial
enlargement
»B-type natriuretic
peptide: elevated
Readily available test
for heart failure. Not
specific to any type of
cardiomyopathy.
◊ Doxorubicin: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
recent administration
of doxorubicin, usually
occurs 1-8 weeks after
the final dose; age >70
years and pre-existing
cardiac disease may
increase risk
features of cardiac
failure due to
systolic dysfunction
(crackles at the lung
bases, peripheral
edema, jugular
venous distension,
hepatomegaly)
»ECG: nonspecific ST-
T wave changes
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
normal or decreased
wall thickness; poor
wall thickening in
systole; left ventricular
dilatation in a
spherical pattern;
diminished stroke
volume on Doppler
echocardiography, with
low ejection fraction;
4-chamber cardiac
enlargement
»endomyocardial
biopsy: vacuolar
degeneration and
interstitial edema; no
inflammatory changes,
histopathologic
grade corresponds
to cumulative dose of
doxorubicin
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Doxorubicin: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Serial echocardiograms
may demonstrate
reduction in ejection
fraction with repeated
doses of doxorubicin
preceding the
development of cardiac
failure.
◊ Heavy metals/chemicals: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
exposure to cobalt,
occupational exposure
to heavy metals, use
of herbal medicines,
nausea and vomiting
with heavy metal
ingestion
horizontal lines
across the fingernails,
neurologic impairment,
features of cardiac
failure due to systolic
dysfunction (crackles
at the lung bases,
peripheral edema,
jugular venous
distension, and
hepatomegaly)
»ECG: nonspecific ST-
T wave changes
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
normal or decreased
wall thickness; poor
wall thickening in
systole; left ventricular
dilatation in a
spherical pattern;
diminished stroke
volume on Doppler
echocardiography, with
low ejection fraction;
4-chamber cardiac
enlargement
»CBC/blood film:
basophilic stippling
with arsenic or lead
ingestion; may show
anemia
»serum chemistries:
renal failure may be
seen with heavy metal
poisoning
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Diabetes mellitus
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of diabetes
mellitus; polyuria,
polydipsia if
undiagnosed;
symptoms of cardiac
failure (shortness of
breath on exertion,
orthopnea, fatigue,
chest pain or pressure,
paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea, abdominal
discomfort, leg
swelling) important to
exclude associated
coronary heart
disease in patients
with diabetes
mellitus who present
with a suspected
cardiomyopathy
signs of complications
from diabetes:
peripheral vascular
disease, ulceration,
diabetic retinopathy;
signs of cardiac
failure: jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, basal crackles
on lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly
»ECG: nonspecific ST-
T wave changes
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
evidence of diastolic
dysfunction and/or
systolic dysfunction
»B-type natriuretic
peptide: elevated
Readily available test
for heart failure. Not
specific to any type of
cardiomyopathy.
»fasting plasma
glucose: >125 mg/dL
»HbA1c: ≥6.5%
◊ Thyroid dysfunction: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
tachycardia,
palpitations,
shortness of breath,
paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea, heat/cold
intolerance, weight
loss/gain, lethargy,
hyperdefecation/
constipation,
depression
signs of
hyperthyroidism:
tachycardia, weight
loss, tremor; signs
of hypothyroidism:
thinning of hair,
numbness in fingers
and dry skin; signs of
cardiac failure: jugular
venous distension,
peripheral edema,
basal crackles on
lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly
»ECG: sinus
bradycardia
(hypothyroidism) or
sinus tachycardia/
atrial fibrillation
(hyperthyroidism)
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
Older adults with
hyperthyroidism may
present with atrial
fibrillation without other
symptoms (apathetic
hyperthyroidism).
»thyroid function
tests: elevated free
T3 and/or free T4
with suppressed
thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) in
hyperthyroidism;
elevated TSH in
primary hypothyroidism
»thyroid uptake and
scan: increased uptake
in region of excess T4
production in instances
of Graves disease or
toxic nodular goiter
Done following
biochemical
confirmation of
hyperthyroidism.
Excludes low-uptake
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Thyroid dysfunction: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
low left ventricular
ejection fraction,
may have pericardial
effusion in
hypothyroidism
In hyperthyroidism,
impaired left ventricular
function may be
seen (e.g., in atrial
fibrillation). Rarely,
high-output failure
occurs.
causes such as
painless or subacute
thyroiditis.
◊ Acromegaly: hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
shortness of breath,
chest pain, orthopnea,
paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea; deep voice
and slowing of speech;
acromegaly can be
asymptomatic
enlargement of hands,
feet, nose, and ears
with a prominent brow
and jaw; signs of
cardiac failure (jugular
venous distension,
peripheral edema,
basal crackles on
lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly)
»ECG: may show left
ventricular hypertrophy
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
concentric biventricular
hypertrophy is seen
in the earlier stages,
»serum insulin
like growth factor-1
(IGF-1) levels:
elevated
Growth hormone values
fluctuate throughout
the day and between
individual people.
IGF-1 is a more reliable
marker.
»oral glucose
tolerance test with
growth hormone
levels: lack of normal
suppression of growth
hormone
Confirms growth
hormone excess.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Acromegaly: hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
with subsequent
development of
diastolic dysfunction
and then impaired
systolic function
»MRI brain: pituitary
tumor
◊ Noonan syndrome: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
may be found in
conjunction with other
cardiac anomalies such
as pulmonary valve
stenosis and septal
defects, problems with
language and speech;
normal intelligence
in the majority of
patients, puberty may
be delayed by up to 2
years, hearing loss in
some
eye signs (downward
sloping, ptosis, wide
set), undescended
testes, short stature,
pectus excavatum
»ECG: left ventricular
hypertrophy and left-
axis deviation often
present; ST-T wave
changes common; P
wave abnormalities
indicating atrial
enlargement
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
»echocardiogram:
left ventricular
hypertrophy and
pulmonary stenosis
»karyotype analysis/
genetic tests: normal
karyotype/mutations
have been reported in
PTPN11, KRAS, and
other genes
Used to exclude
other easily identified
chromosomal defects.
◊ Lentiginosis: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
abnormalities of
genitalia; hearing loss
(sensorineural)
numerous pigmented
skin lesions (lentigines),
pectus excavatum,
hypertelorism
»ECG: left ventricular
hypertrophy and left-
axis deviation often
present; ST-T wave
changes common;
conduction defects are
also common
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
»echocardiogram:
concentric left
ventricular hypertrophy
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
Thiamine deficiency (wet beriberi): dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
chest pain, palpitations,
ankle swelling, anxiety,
mental impairment,
poor appetite,
abdominal pain, alcohol
dependency, poor diet
or oral intake
jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, tachycardia
(signs of high-output
cardiac failure),
peripheral neuropathy,
high blood pressure,
cyanosis
»ECG: sinus
tachycardia and
nonspecific ST-T wave
changes
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
normal or decreased
wall thickness; poor
wall thickening in
systole; left ventricular
dilatation in a
spherical pattern;
diminished stroke
volume on Doppler
echocardiography, with
low ejection fraction;
4-chamber cardiac
enlargement
»trial of thiamine
replacement:
improvement in
symptoms
This is easier and
cheaper than testing for
the deficiency directly,
and excess thiamine is
not toxic.
»thyroid-stimulating
hormone: normal
To exclude
thyrotoxicosis in high-
output cardiac failure.
◊ Friedreich ataxia/muscular dystrophy: hypertrophic and dilated
cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
stumbling and falls,
muscle weakness,
drooping eyelids, visual
and hearing loss,
speech difficulties
loss of proprioception
distally, nystagmus,
scoliosis
»ECG: left ventricular
hypertrophy and T
wave changes, atrial
fibrillation
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
»echocardiogram:
concentric left
ventricular hypertrophy
is common
»electromyography:
reduced sensory and
motor potentials in
Friedreich ataxia
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Deficiency of iron, niacin, selenium, or vitamin D: dilated
cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
poor nutrition; risk
factors for iron
deficiency anemia
(heavy menstrual
cycles, gastrointestinal
losses); history of
bowel pathology
(malabsorption);
fatigue, shortness of
breath, unusual food
cravings (pica due to
iron deficiency)
signs of cardiac
failure (jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, basal crackles
on lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly) pale
mucous membranes
(suggesting anemia)
»ECG: nonspecific ST-
T wave changes
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
normal or decreased
wall thickness; poor
wall thickening in
systole; left ventricular
dilatation in a
spherical pattern;
diminished stroke
volume on Doppler
echocardiography, with
low ejection fraction;
4-chamber cardiac
enlargement
»serum selenium
levels: may be low
»serum iron studies:
low iron and ferritin
levels in iron deficiency
»CBC: Hb low in iron
deficiency
»serum vitamin D
levels: may be low
◊ Systemic lupus erythematosus: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
fatigue, rash, myalgia,
arthritis, painless
hematuria
butterfly rash, discoid
rash, heart murmur
(Libman-Sacks
endocarditis), features
of biventricular
failure; jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, hepatomegaly,
crackles at lung bases
»ECG: variable
nonspecific findings
A normal ECG has a
98% negative predictive
value for left ventricular
systolic dysfunction.[79]
»CXR: enlarged
cardiac silhouette,
pleural effusions,
infiltrates
»serum antinuclear
antibody test: usually
positive
»serum anti-Smith
and anti-double
stranded-DNA
antibodies: usually
positive
Can also be positive in
healthy subjects and in
rheumatoid arthritis.
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Systemic lupus erythematosus: dilated cardiomyopathy
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Common initial test in
evaluation for heart
failure. However, it is
not specific for any type
of cardiomyopathy.
»echocardiogram:
normal or decreased
wall thickness; poor
wall thickening in
systole; left ventricular
dilatation in a
spherical pattern;
diminished stroke
volume on Doppler
echocardiography, with
low ejection fraction;
4-chamber cardiac
enlargement
»activated PTT
levels: may
be prolonged if
antiphospholipid
antibodies are present
»urinalysis:
hematuria, casts, or
proteinuria may be
present, indicating renal
involvement
◊ Endomyocardial fibrosis/Loeffler endocarditis
(hypereosinophilic syndrome)
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
majority of cases occur
following travel to
tropical regions within
15° of the equator;
Loeffler endocarditis
may occur without
precedent travel;
women and children
more commonly
affected; symptoms
depend on which
chambers of the heart
are affected; may
include shortness of
breath (left ventricle) or
peripheral edema (right
ventricle)
dependent on the heart
chamber affected:
jugular venous
distension, edema and
ascites possible with
right ventricular fibrosis;
signs of pulmonary
congestion (e.g.,
crackles, rales) with left
ventricular fibrosis
»CBC: >600 cells/
mL peripheral
blood eosinophils
in hypereosinophilic
syndrome
»CXR: may
demonstrate atrial
enlargement; ventricles
usually normal size
»ECG: may show a
variety of abnormalities
including ST segment
changes, abnormal
P waves, and atrial
fibrillation
A normal ECG is
unusual.
»echocardiogram:
may demonstrate a
pericardial effusion or
fibrosis
»cardiac MRI:
may demonstrate
endomyocardial fibrosis
»endomyocardial
biopsy: reactive
fibrosis and thrombosis
Rarely performed;
may be useful if other
clinical investigations
prove inconclusive to
aid definitive diagnosis.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Uncommon
◊ Sarcoidosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
history of sarcoidosis,
and/or features of
the condition (e.g.
dry cough, eye
symptoms of dryness,
blurred vision, and
red eye); progressive
symptoms of cardiac
failure (shortness of
breath on exertion,
orthopnea, fatigue,
chest pain or pressure,
paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea, abdominal
discomfort, leg
swelling), palpitations,
syncope
signs of cardiac
failure (jugular venous
distension, peripheral
edema, basal crackles
on lung auscultation,
hepatomegaly),
pansystolic murmur,
arrhythmias, lymph
node enlargement,
erythema nodosum
»CXR: may
show lymph node
enlargement (typically
bilateral hilar or
mediastinal nodal
enlargement); less
common features
include a ground-glass
appearance of the
lungs and small pleural
effusions
»serum angiotensin
converting enzyme
(ACE) level: may be
elevated
Elevated in about half
of patients.
»ECG: may show
prolonged PR interval;
higher degrees of heart
block may be present
Patients with biopsy-
proven extracardiac
sarcoidosis should be
screened for cardiac
involvement with a 12-
lead ECG.[106]
»pulmonary
function tests:
restrictive pattern, or
obstructive or mixed
pattern
»lymph node
biopsy: noncaseating
granulomas
»transbronchial
lung biopsy:
noncaseating
granulomas
From mediastinal lymph
nodes if possible.
»cardiac MRI: may
show inflammatory
changes
Cardiac MRI is
increasingly being used
as a useful imaging
technique and FDG-
PET scanning can
be useful for both
the identification of
cardiac sarcoidosis
and for monitoring
disease activity.[13]
[69] [70] [71] [72]
 PET cardiac MRI
can reveal patchy left
ventricular myocardial
delayed enhancement,
as well as increased
FDG uptake in
active inflammatory
lesions involved with
sarcoidosis.
»echocardiogram:
may be normal or
show left ventricular
dysfunction
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Diagnosis
Uncommon
◊ Sarcoidosis
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
Conduction system
abnormalities usually
precede suspicion of
cardiomyopathy.
»endomyocardial
biopsy: granulomatous
involvement, often
patchy
The yield from
endomyocardial biopsy
is relatively low.
◊ Electrolyte disorders
History Exam 1st Test Other tests
symptoms will depend
on the nature/cause
of the electrolyte
abnormality
signs will depend on
the nature/cause of the
electrolyte abnormality
»serum metabolic
panel: may show
low potassium,
calcium, phosphate, or
magnesium levels
Cardiac dysfunction
may be reversible
following treatment
of the underlying
electrolyte abnormality.
»ECG: hypokalemia:
may show ST segment
depression, decreased
amplitude of T
waves, U waves;
hypocalcemia/
hypomagnesemia: may
show prolonged QT
interval
»echocardiogram:
performed for signs of
cardiomyopathy; rarely
may show evidence
of left ventricular
dysfunction
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Online resources
ONLINE RESOURCES
Online resources
1. ESC: HCM Risk-SCD (external link) (http://doc2do.com/hcm/webHCM.html)
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
Key articles
• Arbelo E, Protonotarios A, Gimeno JR, et al. 2023 ESC guidelines for the management of
cardiomyopathies. Eur Heart J. 2023 Oct 1;44(37):3503-626.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/44/37/3503/7246608)   Abstract
• Ommen SR, Ho CY, Asif IM, et al. 2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/SCMR guideline for
the management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of the American Heart Association/
American College of Cardiology joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2024 Jun
4;149(23):e1239-311.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001250) 
Abstract
• Nagueh SF, Phelan D, Abraham T, et al. Recommendations for multimodality cardiovascular
imaging of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: an update from the American Society
of Echocardiography, in collaboration with the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, the
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and the Society of Cardiovascular Computed
Tomography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2022 Jun;35(6):533-69.  Full text (https://onlinejase.com/article/
S0894-7317(22)00140-7/fulltext)   Abstract
• American College of Radiology. ACR appropriateness criteria® Nonischemic myocardial disease with
clinical manifestations (ischemic cardiomyopathy already excluded). May 2021 [internet publication]. 
Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3082580/Narrative)   Abstract
• British Society of Echocardiography. Diagnosis and assessment of dilated cardiomyopathy: a guideline
protocol from the British Society of Echocardiography. Jun 2017 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
echo.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1530/ERP-16-0037)
References
1. Maron BJ, Towbin JA, Thiene G, et al. Contemporary definitions and classification of the
cardiomyopathies: an American Heart Association Scientific Statement from the Council on Clinical
Cardiology, Heart Failure and Transplantation Committee; Quality of Care and Outcomes Research
and Functional Genomics and Translational Biology Interdisciplinary Working Groups; and Council on
Epidemiology and Prevention. Circulation. 2006;113:1807-1816.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/
content/113/14/1807.full.pdf+html)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16567565?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Richardson P, McKenna W, Bristow M, et al. Report of the 1995 World Health Organization/
International Society and Federation of Cardiology Task Force on the Definition and
Classification of cardiomyopathies. Circulation. 1996 Mar 1;93(5):841-2.  Full text (http://
circ.ahajournals.org/content/93/5/841.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8598070?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Elliott P, Andersson B, Arbustini E, et al. Classification of the cardiomyopathies: a position statement
from the European Society Of Cardiology Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases.
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
REFERENCES
Eur Heart J. 2008;29:270-276.  Full text (http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/content/29/2/270.long)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17916581?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Lipshultz SE, Law YM, Asante-Korang A, et al. Cardiomyopathy in Children: Classification and
Diagnosis: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2019 Jul
2;140(1):e9-e68.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000682)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31132865?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Miles C, Fanton Z, Tome M, et al. Inherited cardiomyopathies. BMJ. 2019 May 2;365:l1570.
6. Heymans S, Lakdawala NK, Tschöpe C, et al. Dilated cardiomyopathy: causes, mechanisms, and
current and future treatment approaches. Lancet. 2023 Sep 16;402(10406):998-1011. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37716772?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Elliott PM, Anastasakis A, Borger MA, et al; Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). 2014 ESC guidelines on
diagnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2733-79.  Full text
(http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/content/35/39/2733.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25173338?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Arbelo E, Protonotarios A, Gimeno JR, et al. 2023 ESC guidelines for the management of
cardiomyopathies. Eur Heart J. 2023 Oct 1;44(37):3503-626.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/44/37/3503/7246608)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37622657?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Ommen SR, Ho CY, Asif IM, et al. 2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/SCMR guideline for
the management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of the American Heart Association/
American College of Cardiology joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2024 Jun
4;149(23):e1239-311.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001250) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38718139?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Rowin EJ, Link MS, Maron MS, et al. Evolving contemporary management of atrial fibrillation
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation. 2023 Nov 28;148(22):1797-811.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.123.065037)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38011245?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Marstrand P, Han L, Day SM, et al. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with left ventricular systolic
dysfunction: insights from the share registry. Circulation. 2020 Apr 28;141(17):1371-83.  Full
text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7182243)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/32228044?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Nagueh SF, Phelan D, Abraham T, et al. Recommendations for multimodality cardiovascular
imaging of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: an update from the American Society
of Echocardiography, in collaboration with the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, the
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and the Society of Cardiovascular Computed
Tomography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2022 Jun;35(6):533-69.  Full text (https://onlinejase.com/
article/S0894-7317(22)00140-7/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35659037?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
13. American College of Radiology. ACR appropriateness criteria® Nonischemic myocardial disease with
clinical manifestations (ischemic cardiomyopathy already excluded). May 2021 [internet publication]. 
Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3082580/Narrative)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33651982?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Writing Group Members, Doherty JU, Kort S, et al. ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HRS/SCAI/SCCT/
SCMR/STS 2019 appropriate use criteria for multimodality imaging in the assessment of cardiac
structure and function in nonvalvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology
appropriate use criteria task force, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart
Association, American Society of Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart
Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular
Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2019 Apr;157(4):e153-82.  Full text (https://www.jtcvs.org/
article/S0022-5223(18)33502-5/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30635178?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Guazzi M, Adams V, Conraads V, et al. EACPR/AHA Scientific Statement. Clinical recommendations
for cardiopulmonary exercise testing data assessment in specific patient populations. Circulation.
2012;126:2261-2674.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/126/18/2261.long)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22952317?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Christiaans I, van Engelen K, van Langen IM, et al. Risk stratification for sudden cardiac death in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: systematic review of clinical risk markers. Europace. 2010;12:313-321.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20118111?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Garratt CJ, Elliott P, Behr E, et al. Heart Rhythm UK position statement on clinical indications for
implantable cardioverter defibrillators in adult patients with familial sudden cardiac death syndromes.
Europace. 2010;12:1156-1175.  Full text (http://europace.oxfordjournals.org/content/12/8/1156.long)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20663787?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. O'Mahony C, Tome-Esteban M, Lambiase PD, et al. A validation study of the 2003 American
College of Cardiology/European Society of Cardiology and 2011 American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association risk stratification and treatment algorithms for sudden
cardiac death in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart. 2013;99:534-541. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23339826?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. McKeown PP, Muir AR. Risk assessment in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: contemporary
guidelines hampered by insufficient evidence. Heart. 2013;99:511-513.  Full text (http://
heart.bmj.com/content/99/8/511.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23376948?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Aquaro GD, Masci P, Formisano F, et al. Usefulness of delayed enhancement by magnetic
resonance imaging in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy as a marker of disease and its severity.
Am J Cardiol. 2010;105:392-397. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20102955?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
REFERENCES
21. O'Hanlon R, Grasso A, Roughton M, et al. Prognostic significance of myocardial fibrosis
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:867-874. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20688032?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Maron BJ, Maron MS. LGE means better selection of HCM patients for primary prevention implantable
defibrillators. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2016 Jul 14 [Epub ahead of print]. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27450875?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. O'Mahony C, Jichi F, Pavlou M, et al; Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Outcomes Investigators.
A novel clinical risk prediction model for sudden cardiac death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(HCM risk-SCD). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:2010-2020.  Full text (http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/
content/35/30/2010.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24126876?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Bos JM, Towbin JA, Ackerman MJ. Diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic implications of genetic
testing for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:201-211. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19589432?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Hoffmann B. Fabry disease: recent advances in pathology, diagnosis, treatment and monitoring.
Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009;4:21.  Full text (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2768700/?
tool=pubmed)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19818152?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Sarkozy A, Digilio MC, Dallapiccola B. Leopard syndrome. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2008;3:13.  Full
text (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2467408/?tool=pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18505544?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Schulz JB, Boesch S, Bürk K, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of Friedreich ataxia: a European
perspective. Nat Rev Neurol. 2009;5:222-234. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19347027?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Towbin JA. Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2009;32(Suppl 2):S23-S31.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19602159?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Cheng TO. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy vs athlete's heart. Int J Cardiol. 2009;131:151-155. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19028403?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Corrado D, Anastasakis A, Basso C, et al. Proposed diagnostic criteria for arrhythmogenic
cardiomyopathy: European Task Force consensus report. Int J Cardiol. 2024 Jan 15;395:131447. 
Full text (https://www.internationaljournalofcardiology.com/article/S0167-5273(23)01509-7/fulltext)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37844667?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Corrado D, Basso C, Judge DP. Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy. Circ Res. 2017 Sep
15;121(7):784-802.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.309345)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28912183?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Basso C, Corrado D, Marcus FI, et al. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy.
Lancet. 2009;373:1289-1300. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19362677?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
33. Thiene G, Nava A, Corrado D, et al. Right ventricular cardiomyopathy and sudden death in
young people. N Engl J Med. 1988 Jan 21;318(3):129-33.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1056/
NEJM198801213180301)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3336399?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Rampazzo A. Genetic bases of arrhythmogenic right ventricular Cardiomyopathy. Heart
Int. 2006;2(1):17.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.4081/hi.2006.17)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21977247?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. McKenna WJ, Thiene G, Nava A, et al. Diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/
cardiomyopathy. Br Heart J. 1994;71:215-218.  Full text (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC483655/pdf/brheartj00172-0007.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8142187?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. Hamid MS, Norman M, Quraishi A, et al. Prospective evaluation of relatives for familial arrhythmogenic
right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia reveals a need to broaden diagnostic criteria. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2002:40:1445-1450. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12392835?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Corrado D, Basso C, Thiene G. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy: diagnosis,
prognosis, and treatment. Heart. 2000;83:588-595.  Full text (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1760807/pdf/v083p00588.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10768917?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Pinto YM, Elliott PM, Arbustini E, et al. Proposal for a revised definition of dilated cardiomyopathy,
hypokinetic non-dilated cardiomyopathy, and its implications for clinical practice: a position
statement of the ESC working group on myocardial and pericardial diseases. Eur Heart J.
2016;37:1850-1858.  Full text (http://eurheartj.oxfordjournals.org/content/37/23/1850.long)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26792875?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Jefferies JL, Towbin JA. Dilated cardiomyopathy. Lancet 2010;375:752-762. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20189027?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Malhotra R, Mason PK. Lamin A/C deficiency as a cause of familial dilated cardiomyopathy.
Curr Opin Cardiol. 2009;24:203-208. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19384091?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Boudina S, Abel ED. Diabetic cardiomyopathy, causes and effects. Rev Endocr Metab Disord.
2010;11:31-39.  Full text (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2914514/?tool=pubmed)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20180026?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Kushwaha SS, Fallon JT, Fuster V. Restrictive cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:267-276.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8995091?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Zangwill S, Hamilton R. Restrictive cardiomyopathy. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2009;32(Suppl 2):S41-
S43. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19602161?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
REFERENCES
44. Cooper LT Jr. Myocarditis. N Engl J Med. 2009 Apr 9;360(15):1526-38.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5814110)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19357408?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Cooper LT, Baughman KL, Feldman AM, et al. The role of endomyocardial biopsy in the
management of cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2007 Nov 6;116(19):2216-33.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.186093)
46. Akashi YJ, Goldstein DS, Barbaro G, et al. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy: a new form of acute,
reversible heart failure. Circulation. 2008;118:2574-2762.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/
cgi/content/full/118/25/2754)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19106400?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Prasad A, Lerman A, Rihal CS. Apical ballooning syndrome (Tako-Tsubo or stress cardiomyopathy):
a mimic of acute myocardial infarction. Am Heart J. 2008;155:408-417. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18294473?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Sliwa K, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Petrie MC, et al; Heart Failure Association of the European Society of
Cardiology Working Group on Peripartum Cardiomyopathy. Current state of knowledge on aetiology,
diagnosis, management, and therapy of peripartum cardiomyopathy: a position statement from the
Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on peripartum
cardiomyopathy. Eur J Heart Fail. 2010;12:767-778.  Full text (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1093/eurjhf/hfq120/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20675664?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Bauersachs J, Arrigo M, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, et al. Current management of patients with severe
acute peripartum cardiomyopathy: practical guidance from the Heart Failure Association of the
European Society of Cardiology Study Group on peripartum cardiomyopathy. Eur J Heart Fail. 2016
Sep;18(9):1096-105.  Full text (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ejhf.586/abstract)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27338866?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Brar SS, Khan SS, Sandhu GK, et al. Incidence, mortality, and racial differences in peripartum
cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:302-304. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17631087?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Elkayam U, Akhter MW, Singh H, et al. Pregnancy-associated cardiomyopathy: clinical characteristics
and a comparison between early and late presentation. Circulation. 2005;111:2050-2055.  Full text
(http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/111/16/2050)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15851613?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Goland S, Modi K, Bitar F, et al. Clinical profile and predictors of complications in peripartum
cardiomyopathy. J Card Fail. 2009;15:645-650. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19786252?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Shinbane JS, Wood MA, Jensen DN, et al. Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy: a review of animal
models and clinical studies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;29:709-15. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9091514?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
54. Calò L, De Ruvo E, Sette A, et al. Tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy: mechanisms of heart failure
and clinical implications. J Cardiovasc Med. 2007;8:138-143. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17312430?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Maredia N, Ray SG. Cardiac amyloidosis. Clin Med. 2005;5:504-509. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16268336?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Garcia-Pavia P, Rapezzi C, Adler Y, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of cardiac amyloidosis: a position
statement of the ESC working group on myocardial and pericardial diseases. Eur Heart J. 2021
Apr 21;42(16):1554-68.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehab072)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33825853?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Lubitz SA, Goldbarg SH, Mehta D. Sudden cardiac death in infiltrative cardiomyopathies: sarcoidosis,
scleroderma, amyloidosis, hemachromatosis. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2008 Jul-Aug;51(1):58-73.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18634918?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58. Dorbala S, Ando Y, Bokhari S, et al. ASNC/AHA/ASE/EANM/HFSA/ISA/SCMR/SNMMI Expert
consensus recommendations for multimodality imaging in cardiac amyloidosis: Part 1 of 2-Evidence
base and standardized methods of imaging. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2021 Jul;14(7):e000029.  Full
text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/HCI.0000000000000029)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34196223?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Kottam A, Hanneman K, Schenone A, et al. State-of-the-art imaging of infiltrative cardiomyopathies:
a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2023
Nov;16(11):e000081.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/HCI.0000000000000081)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37916407?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Guertl B, Noehammer C, Hoefler G. Metabolic cardiomyopathies. Int J Exp Pathol. 2000;81:349-372.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11298185?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Bristow MR, Mason JW, Billingham ME, et al. Doxorubicin cardiomyopathy: evaluation by
phonocardiography, endomyocardial biopsy, and cardiac catheterization. Ann Intern Med.
1978;88:168-175. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/626445?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Guglin M, Hartlage G, Reynolds C, et al. Trastuzumab-induced cardiomyopathy: not as benign as it
looks? A retrospective study. J Card Fail. 2009;15:651-657. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19786253?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Fernández-Solà J, Fatjó F, Sacanella E, et al. Evidence of apoptosis in alcoholic cardiomyopathy.
Hum Pathol. 2006;37:1100-1110. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16867874?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64. Alexander CS. Cobalt-beer cardiomyopathy. A clinical and pathologic study of twenty-eight
cases. Am J Med. 1972;53:395-417. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4263183?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
REFERENCES
65. Galderisi M. Diastolic dysfunction and diabetic cardiomyopathy: evaluation by Doppler
echocardiography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:1548-1551. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17045886?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Akbarian M, Yankopoulos NA, Abelmann WH. Hemodynamic studies in beriberi heart disease.
Am J Med. 1966;41:197-212. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/5912298?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Kim JS, Judson MA, Donnino R, et al. Cardiac sarcoidosis. Am Heart J. 2009;157:9-21. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19081391?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. De Bortoli A, Culver DA, Kron J, et al. An international survey of current clinical practice in
the treatment of cardiac sarcoidosis. Am J Cardiol. 2023 Sep 15:203:184-92. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37499598?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
69. Kouranos V, Sharma R. Cardiac sarcoidosis: state-of-the-art review. Heart. 2021 Oct;107(19):1591-9.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33674355?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. Lehtonen J, Uusitalo V, Pöyhönen P, et al. Cardiac sarcoidosis: phenotypes, diagnosis, treatment, and
prognosis. Eur Heart J. 2023 May 1;44(17):1495-510.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC10149532)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36924191?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
71. Sohn DW, Park JB. Cardiac sarcoidosis. Heart. 2023 Jul 12;109(15):1132-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36631144?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Cheng RK, Kittleson MM, Beavers CJ, et al. Diagnosis and management of cardiac
sarcoidosis: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2024 May 21;149(21):e1197-216.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/
CIR.0000000000001240)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38634276?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Writing Committee, Kontos MC, de Lemos JA, et al. 2022 ACC expert consensus decision pathway
on the evaluation and disposition of acute chest pain in the emergency department: a report of the
American College of Cardiology solution set oversight committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Nov
15;80(20):1925-60.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10691881)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36241466?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74. Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline
for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association joint committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2021 Nov
30;144(22):e368-454.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34709879?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
75. Zheng ZJ, Croft JB, Giles WH, et al. Sudden cardiac death in the United States, 1989 to 1998.
Circulation. 2001;104:2158-2163.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/104/18/2158)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11684624?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. Corrado D, Basso C, Schiavon M, et al. Screening for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in young
athletes. New Engl J Med. 1998;339:364-369.  Full text (http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
NEJM199808063390602#t=article)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9691102?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
77. Wisten A, Andersson S, Forsberg H, et al. Sudden cardiac death in the young in Sweden:
electrocardiogram in relation to forensic diagnosis. J Intern Med. 2004;255:213-220.  Full text
(http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1046/j.1365-2796.2003.01277.x/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14746558?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
78. Doolan A, Langlois N, Semsarian C. Causes of sudden cardiac death in young Australians. Med
J Aust. 2004 Feb 2;180(3):110-2.  Full text (https://www.mja.com.au/journal/2004/180/3/causes-
sudden-cardiac-death-young-australians)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14748671?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
79. Davie AP, Francis CM, Love MP, et al. Value of the electrocardiogram in identifying heart failure
due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction. BMJ. 1996;312:222.  Full text (http://www.bmj.com/
cgi/content/full/312/7025/222)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8563589?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80. British Society of Echocardiography. Diagnosis and assessment of dilated cardiomyopathy: a guideline
protocol from the British Society of Echocardiography. Jun 2017 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
echo.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1530/ERP-16-0037)
81. Raman B, Ariga R, Spartera M, et al. Progression of myocardial fibrosis in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: mechanisms and clinical implications. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019 Feb
1;20(2):157-67.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6343081)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30358845?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82. Schwefer M, Aschenbach R, Heidemann J, et al. Constrictive pericarditis, still a diagnostic challenge:
comprehensive review of clinical management. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2009;36:502-510. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19394850?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
83. Hershberger RE, Givertz MM, Ho CY, et al. Genetic Evaluation of Cardiomyopathy-A Heart
Failure Society of America Practice Guideline. J Card Fail. 2018 May;24(5):281-302.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.cardfail.2018.03.004)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29567486?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
84. Finsterer J. Mitochondriopathies. Eur J Neurol 2004;11:163-186. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15009163?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
85. Wilde AAM, Amin AS, Morita H, et al. Use, misuse, and pitfalls of the drug challenge test in
the diagnosis of the Brugada syndrome. Eur Heart J. 2023 Jul 14;44(27):2427-39.  Full text
(https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10702857)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37345279?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
86. Maron MS, Olivotto I, Zenovich AG, et al. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is predominantly a disease
of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. Circulation. 2006 Nov 21;114(21):2232-9.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.644682)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17088454?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
REFERENCES
87. Shah JS, Esteban MT, Thaman R, et al. Prevalence of exercise-induced left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction in symptomatic patients with non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Heart. 2008
Oct;94(10):1288-94.  Full text (https://heart.bmj.com/content/94/10/1288.long)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18032461?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
88. Jensen MK, Havndrup O, Pecini R, et al. Comparison of Valsalva manoeuvre and exercise
in echocardiographic evaluation of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Eur J Echocardiogr. 2010 Oct;11(9):763-9.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
ehjcimaging/article-abstract/11/9/763/2396819)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20472917?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
89. Nunoda S, Genda A, Sekiguchi M, et al. Left ventricular endomyocardial biopsy findings in patients
with essential hypertension and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with special reference to the incidence of
bizarre myocardial hypertrophy with disorganization and biopsy score. Heart Vessels. 1985;1:170-175.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3831023?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
90. Takemura G, Takatsu Y, Fujiwara H. Luminal narrowing of coronary capillaries in human
hypertrophic hearts: an ultrastructural morphometrical study using endomyocardial biopsy
specimens. Heart. 1998;79:78-85.  Full text (http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/picrender.fcgi?
artid=1728580&blobtype=pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9505925?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
91. Blomström-Lundqvist C, Selin K, Jonsson R, et al. Cardioangiographic findings in patients
with arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia. Br Heart J. 1988;59:556-563.  Full text (http://
www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/picrender.fcgi?artid=1276896&blobtype=pdf)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3382567?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
92. Krahn AD, Behr ER, Hamilton R, et al. Brugada syndrome. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2022
Mar;8(3):386-405.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405500X2101080X)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35331438?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
93. Bayés de Luna A, Brugada J, Baranchuk A, et al. Current electrocardiographic criteria for diagnosis
of Brugada pattern: a consensus report. J Electrocardiol. 2012 Sep;45(5):433-42. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22920782?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
94. Cronin EM, Bogun FM, Maury P, et al. 2019 HRS/EHRA/APHRS/LAHRS expert consensus statement
on catheter ablation of ventricular arrhythmias. Europace. 2019 Aug 1;21(8):1143-4.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7967791)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31075787?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
95. Zeppenfeld K, Tfelt-Hansen J, de Riva M, et al. 2022 ESC Guidelines for the management of patients
with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death. Eur Heart J. 2022 Oct
21;43(40):3997-4126.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/40/3997/6675633)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36017572?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
96. Priori SG, Wilde AA, Horie M, et al. Executive summary: HRS/EHRA/APHRS expert consensus
statement on the diagnosis and management of patients with inherited primary arrhythmia syndromes.
62 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 63 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
Heart Rhythm. 2013 Dec;10(12):e85-108. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23916535?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
97. Wolf CM, Berul CI. Inherited conduction system abnormalities: one group of diseases, many
genes. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2006;17:446-455. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16643374?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
98. Palladini G, Russo P, Bosoni T, et al. Identification of amyloidogenic light chains requires the
combination of serum-free light chain assay with immunofixation of serum and urine. Clin Chem. 2009
Mar;55(3):499-504.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1373/clinchem.2008.117143)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19131635?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
99. Poterucha TJ, Elias P, Bokhari S, et al. Diagnosing transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis by Technetium
Tc 99m pyrophosphate: a test in evolution. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2021 Jun;14(6):1221-31. 
Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8113330)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33221204?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
100. Ruberg FL, Maurer MS. Cardiac amyloidosis due to transthyretin protein: a review. JAMA. 2024 Mar
5;331(9):778-91. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38441582?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
101. Gillmore JD, Maurer MS, Falk RH, et al. Nonbiopsy diagnosis of cardiac transthyretin
amyloidosis. Circulation. 2016 Jun 14;133(24):2404-12.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.116.021612)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27143678?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
102. Anderson LJ, Holden S, Davis B, et al. Cardiovascular T2-star (T2*) magnetic resonance for
the early diagnosis of myocardial iron overload. Eur Heart J. 2001 Dec;22(23):2171-9.  Full
text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-abstract/22/23/2171/511799)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11913479?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
103. Triadyaksa P, Oudkerk M, Sijens PE. Cardiac T(2) * mapping: techniques and clinical applications.
J Magn Reson Imaging. 2020 Nov;52(5):1340-51.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC7687175)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31837078?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
104. Kounas S, Demetrescu C, Pantazis AA, et al. The binary endocardial appearance is a poor
discriminator of Anderson-Fabry disease from familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2008;51:2058-2061. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18498962?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
105. Thompson RB, Chow K, Khan A, et al. T₁ mapping with cardiovascular MRI is highly sensitive for
Fabry disease independent of hypertrophy and sex. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2013 Sep;6(5):637-45. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCIMAGING.113.000482)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23922004?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
106. Birnie DH, Sauer WH, Bogun F, et al. HRS expert consensus statement on the diagnosis and
management of arrhythmias associated with cardiac sarcoidosis. Heart Rhythm. 2014;11:1305-1323. 
Full text (http://www.hrsonline.org/Practice-Guidance/Clinical-Guidelines-Documents/2014-Diagnosis-
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
63
=== Page 64 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy References
REFERENCES
and-Management-of-Arrhythmias-Associated-with-Cardiac-Sarcoidosis#axzz3Bg7hj9cP)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24819193?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 65 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Images
Images
Figure 1: Diseases that may cause cardiomyopathy
Elliott P, et al. Eur Heart J 2008; 29: 270-76; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
65
=== Page 66 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Images
IMAGES
Figure 2: Proposed classification system
Elliott P, Andersson B, Arbustini E, et al. Classification of the cardiomyopathies: a position statement from
the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases. Eur Heart J.
2008;29:270-276. Used with permission.
66 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 67 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Images
Figure 3: Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 4-chamber echocardiographic view with contrast
Ahmed I, Smalley SJ, Zhu DWX, et al. Sudden cardiac arrest in apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. BMJ
Case Reports. 2009;doi:10.1136/bcr.04.2009.17
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
67
=== Page 68 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Images
IMAGES
Figure 4: Dilated cardiomyopathy: echocardiogram
Tanejal AK, Wong J, Bayliss J. Antipsychotic-drug-induced dilated cardiomyopathy. BMJ Case Reports. 2009;
doi:10.1136/bcr.09.2008.0958
68 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 69 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Images
Figure 5: Left ventriculogram demonstrating apical ballooning in tako-tsubo cardiomyopathy
Augustine DX, Domanski A, Garg A. The stress of chest pain: a case of tako-tsubo cardiomyopathy. BMJ
Case Reports. 2009; doi:10.1136/bcr.03.2009.1660
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
69
=== Page 70 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
70 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 71 ===
Evaluation of cardiomyopathy Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
71
=== Page 72 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Katie Linden, BMSc, MBChB
Cardiology Specialty Registrar
Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, Northern Ireland
DISCLOSURES: KL was reimbursed by Takeda UK Ltd., the manufacturer of Replagal for Fabry disease,
for travel and accommodation for a leadership course. KL was reimbursed by Sanofi Aventis, the
manufacturer of Genzyme for Fabry disease, for travel and accommodation for a conference. KL received a
speaker fee from Sanofi Aventis, the manufacturer of Genzyme, for a talk on Fabry disease. There was no
contractual right by Sanofi to control the content of this talk.
Alison Muir, MD
Consultant Cardiologist
Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, UK
DISCLOSURES: AM is an author of a reference cited in this topic.
// Acknowledgements:
KL and AM would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Pascal McKeown, a previous contributor to this topic.
PM is an author of a reference cited in this topic.
// Peer Reviewers:
Lubna Choudhury, MB BCh, MD, MRCPI, FACC
Professor of Medicine
Division of Cardiology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
DISCLOSURES: LC declares that she has no competing interests.
John Coltart, MD, FRCP, FACC, FESC, MRCS
Consultant Cardiologist
Cardio-thoracic Unit, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital, London, UK
DISCLOSURES: JC declares that he has no competing interests.
Vaikom S. Mahadevan, MBBS, MRCP
Consultant Cardiologist
Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, UK
DISCLOSURES: VSM declares that he has no competing interests.
