# Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction

=== Page 1 ===
Heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Jan 08, 2025
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  5
Epidemiology  5
Etiology  5
Pathophysiology  5
Classification  6
Case history  7
Diagnosis  8
Approach  8
History and exam  17
Risk factors  18
Tests  21
Differentials  30
Criteria  32
Screening  35
Management  36
Approach  36
Treatment algorithm overview  42
Treatment algorithm  43
Emerging  53
Primary prevention  53
Secondary prevention  58
Patient discussions  58
Follow up  59
Monitoring  59
Complications  60
Prognosis  60
Guidelines  62
Diagnostic guidelines  62
Treatment guidelines  63
References  65
Images  83
Disclaimer  93
=== Page 3 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Overview
Summary
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is a complex clinical syndrome in which patients have
symptoms and signs of heart failure, with left ventricular ejection fraction ≥50%.
The most common risk factors and comorbidities are hypertension, obesity, chronic kidney disease, diabetes
mellitus, and coronary artery disease. Advanced age and female sex are also important risk factors.
Diagnosis is based on symptoms (commonly dyspnea), clinical evidence of congestion, measurement of
natriuretic peptides, and comprehensive echocardiography. Scoring systems (H₂FPEF and HFA-PEFF) are
available to help discriminate HFpEF from other causes of dyspnea.
The goals of treatment are to reduce symptoms, reduce hospitalizations, and improve patients’ functional
status.
Management includes identification and treatment of underlying causes and comorbidities, implementing
lifestyle measures where appropriate (exercise, diet, weight control), and pharmacotherapy including sodium-
glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors, diuretics as needed, and consideration of aldosterone antagonists,
angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors, and angiotensin-II receptor antagonists.
Most patients with HFpEF can be managed by general cardiologists. However, patients who are poorly
responsive to diuretic therapy, have frequent hospitalizations for heart failure, worsening end organ
dysfunction, low blood pressure, and other conditions with heart failure (e.g., amyloid and constrictive
pericarditis) should be cared for at a heart failure center by a heart failure specialist.
Definition
Heart failure is a complex clinical syndrome resulting from the impaired ability of the heart to cope with the
metabolic needs of the body, resulting in breathlessness, fatigue, and fluid retention. A universal definition
of heart failure, proposed in 2021 by the Heart Failure Society of America, the Heart Failure Association of
the European Society of Cardiology, and the Japanese Heart Failure Society, describes heart failure as "a
clinical syndrome with symptoms and/or signs caused by a structural and/or functional cardiac abnormality
and corroborated by elevated natriuretic peptide levels and/or objective evidence of pulmonary or systemic
congestion."[1]
Patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) have symptoms and signs of heart
failure, with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) ≥50%, not attributable to an underlying cause such as
infiltrative cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, valvular disease, pericardial disease, or high-output
heart failure.[1] [2] Guidelines from the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology/Heart
Failure Society of America include evidence of spontaneous (at rest) or provokable (e.g., during exercise,
fluid challenge) increased LV filling pressures (e.g., elevated natriuretic peptide, noninvasive/invasive
hemodynamic measurement) in the classification of HFpEF, and the updated European Society of Cardiology
guidelines include the objective evidence of cardiac structural and/or functional abnormalities consistent with
the presence of LV diastolic dysfunction or raised LV filling pressure, or raised natriuretic peptides.[3] [4] [5]
In clinical practice, HFpEF was traditionally reported as diastolic heart failure. This was in comparison to
"systolic" heart failure, which is now known as heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). Although
several abnormalities in diastolic parameters/dysfunction on echocardiogram are an integral part of the
development of clinical syndrome of HFpEF, the two entities are not synonymous and diastolic dysfunction
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Overview
OVERVIEW
has also been shown not to be unique to HFpEF. Diastolic dysfunction on echocardiogram is also seen in
systolic heart failure and in some patients with no clinical evidence of heart failure. There are several other
abnormalities in HFpEF and it is now known to be a multisystem disorder involving the heart, kidneys, lungs,
vascular system, skeletal muscle, immune and inflammatory signaling.[6] [7] [8]
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Theory
Epidemiology
Estimates based on National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data from 2017-2020
suggest that around 6.7 million adults ≥20 years of age had heart failure (HF) in the US.[9] Prevalence is
increasing in the US, and is projected to rise from 2.4% of the total US population in 2012 to 3.0% in 2030.[9]
 The CaReMe study, which uses data from healthcare registries in Belgium, Canada, Germany, Israel, Italy,
Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK, reported the prevalence of HF in the adult
population to be 1% to 2%, depending on whether a broad or strict definition was used.[10]
The incidence and prevalence of HFpEF specifically are increasing, and are increasing relative to heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF).[11] Studies suggest that approximately 50% of heart failure
patients have HFpEF; however, HFpEF is expected to become the most prevalent HF subtype in the
future.[11] [12] [13]
Risk of HFpEF increases with age and additional strong risk factors include hypertension, obesity, diabetes
mellitus, atrial fibrillation (AF), and coronary artery disease (CAD).[12] [13] [14] [15] HFpEF is more
common in women (79%), whereas HFrEF is equally prevalent in women and men.[16] [17] Comorbidity
and multimorbidity is common in patients with HF.[3] One study looking at twelve common comorbidities
(CAD, AF/flutter, hypertension, peripheral artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, anemia, obesity,
hypercholesterolemia, diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, COPD, and chronic kidney disease) found that
98% to 99% of HF patients had at least one comorbidity, and those with HFpEF had a mean comorbidity
burden of 4.3.[18] Noncardiovascular comorbidities such as anemia, hypothyroidism, renal impairment,
chronic lung disease, and liver disease are more prevalent in the HFpEF population.[19]
Etiology
Common risk factors and comorbidities of HFpEF include hypertension, coronary artery disease, diabetes,
atrial fibrillation, obesity, and renal dysfunction.[2] [4]
Other conditions can cause HF with a preserved EF and should be considered in the differential diagnosis
of HFpEF. These are also known as HFpEF "mimics" and include infiltrative cardiomyopathies (e.g.,
amyloidosis, hemochromatosis), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, valvular disease, pericardial disease, or high-
output heart failure.[2] [11]
Amyloid cardiomyopathy is an underdiagnosed cause of HF and should be considered, especially when there
are typical findings (low complexes on resting 12-lead ECG, speckled concentric hypertrophy on echo).[4]
 HFpEF mimics have specific management options that differ from HFpEF, and are not covered in this topic.
Pathophysiology
Diastole is a dynamic process that begins as contraction finishes and includes isovolumetric relaxation and
early ventricular filling. Impaired relaxation and altered ventricular filling can result in diastolic dysfunction.
Ventricular relaxation is an active process mediated by ATP and controlled primarily by calcium uptake by the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. The seminal studies on HFpEF described prolonged isovolumic left ventricular (LV)
relaxation, increased diastolic LV stiffness, and slow LV filling.[20] [21] LV diastolic dysfunction results from
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Theory
THEORY
increased myocardial stiffness, in the absence of pericardial or endocardial disease. Both the extracellular
matrix and the cardiomyocytes contribute to myocardial stiffness.
Ventricular filling is affected by elasticity, compliance, and stiffness, which are measured in end-diastole. An
increase in chamber stiffness may occur secondary to any combination of the following:[22]
• A rise in filling pressures due to volume overloaded states, such as valvular regurgitation and dilated
cardiomyopathy
• A steeper pressure-volume curve, whether from ventricular hypertrophy/concentric remodeling (from
hypertension, aortic stenosis, etc.) or from increased extracellular matrix leading to myocardial
restriction (amyloidosis, endomyocardial fibrosis, etc.)
• A decrease in ventricular distensibility caused by extrinsic compression of the ventricles, as seen in
tamponade or constrictive pericarditis.
The resulting elevation in LV filling pressures causes elevation in the pulmonary capillary pressures,
causing symptoms of pulmonary congestion. Elevation of pressures in the left atrium may predispose to
complications such as atrial arrhythmias.
In HFpEF, myocardial dysfunction and remodeling are driven by endothelial inflammation and oxidative
stress.[23] Comorbidities such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, and renal insufficiency induce systemic inflammation and endothelial dysfunction with elevated
plasma levels of inflammatory biomarkers, including soluble interleukin 1 receptor-like 1 (IL1RL1), C-reactive
protein (CRP), growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15), (IL)-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, soluble
ST2 (sST2), pentraxin 3, reactive oxygen species (ROS), vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM), and E-
selectin.[23] [24]
Endothelial inflammation and the presence of ROS leads to reduced bioavailability of nitric oxide and
production of peroxynitrite, which lowers soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) activity in adjacent cardiomyocytes.
Lower sGC activity decreases cyclic guanosine monophosphate concentration and protein kinase G activity,
which increases resting tension and promotes cardiomyocyte stiffness and hypertrophy.[23] [24] ROS also
trigger cardiomyocyte death by autophagy, apoptosis, or necrosis, with the myocytes replaced with fibrous
tissue.[23]
Myocardial fibrosis with collagen deposition causes diastolic LV dysfunction. The inflammatory markers
VCAM and E-selectin attract leukocytes that release transforming growth factor β (TGF-β). TGF-β stimulates
conversion of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts, which deposit collagen.[23] [24]
Inflammatory biomarkers affect the lungs, myocardium, skeletal muscle, and kidneys, promoting pulmonary
hypertension, myocardial remodeling, deficient skeletal muscle oxygen extraction during exercise, and renal
sodium retention.[24]
Classification
Universal definition and classification of heart failure:
classifications of heart failure according to ejection fraction[1]
• Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF): heart failure with left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF) ≤40%.
• Heart failure with mildly reduced ejection fraction (HFmrEF): heart failure with LVEF 41% to 49%
• Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF): heart failure with LVEF ≥50%
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Theory
• Heart failure with improved ejection fraction (HFimpEF): heart failure with a baseline LVEF of ≤40%, a
≥10-point increase from baseline LVEF, and a second measurement of LVEF of >40%.
Case history
Case history #1
A 76-year-old woman presents to the outpatient clinic with increasing breathlessness on moderate
exertion that has been gradually worsening in the past 6 months. She is a fairly active and healthy person
except for a history of hypertension that her primary care physician has been treating for about 20 years
with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide. She has not experienced any chest pain with exertion. On physical
examination, her BP is 164/83 mmHg and she has raised jugular venous pressure with hepatojugular
reflux, and no lower extremity edema. Her cardiac examination reveals a nondisplaced apical impulse,
normal S1 and S2, and a fairly loud S4 with no murmurs. Investigations confirm preserved systolic
function with evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy and left atrial dilatation. Her N-terminal prohormone
B-natriuretic peptide is 1623 picograms/mL.
Case history #2
A 56-year-old woman presents to the emergency department with shortness of breath at rest, orthopnea,
and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea that developed in the last 5 days. Her past medical history includes
obesity, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and chronic kidney disease stage II. She had a cardiac
catheterization done 2 years ago due to exertional chest pain that revealed nonobstructive coronary
artery disease. On exam she is tachycardic with a heart rate of 110 bpm and her blood pressure is 192/98
mmHg. She has jugular venous distention up to her jaws, trace lower extremity edema, and bibasal
crackles. She has a normal S1 and S2, but has a summation gallop with no murmurs.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Approach
Diagnosis of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is challenging. The patient's history and
risk factors may help, but imaging of the cardiovascular system and measurement of biomarkers are needed
for a definitive diagnosis.[3] [4]
According to the universal definition of heart failure (HF), the diagnosis requires presence of symptoms and/
or signs of HF caused by a structural and/or functional cardiac abnormality and either elevated natriuretic
peptide levels or objective evidence of pulmonary or systemic congestion, or both.[1]
History
The initial history should include an assessment of symptoms and the patient's functional capacity.
Clinical symptoms and signs in HFpEF are often nonspecific, although the primary symptoms are
breathlessness, fatigue, and fluid retention. Patients often find their exercise tolerance is limited by fatigue
and breathlessness. Weight gain, peripheral edema, and abdominal congestion are common.[2] [11] [58]
 The New York Heart Association functional classification is used to describe the extent of a patient's
symptoms. Patients with no symptoms are considered to be in class I. Patients with slight limitation of
physical activity, such as dyspnea, fatigue, and palpitations, are considered to be in class II. Patients in
class III have marked limitation of physical activity and patients in class IV have symptoms of heart failure
at rest.[59]
Comorbidities and risk factors
A thorough history should be obtained in patients who present with signs and symptoms of heart failure,
to identify comorbidities and risk factors for HFpEF (such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and
renal insufficiency) as well as behaviors that might precipitate or accelerate the course of heart failure.
Prevalence of individual chronic conditions in heart failure patients with
preserved and reduced ejection fraction. Left panel, men; right panel, women
Chamberlain AM, et al. Am J Med. 2015 Jan; 128(1): 38-45; used with permission
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
It is also important to consider potential HFpEF mimics (e.g., infiltrative cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, valvular disease, pericardial disease), which may present with congestion, dyspnea,
exercise intolerance, and for which there may be specific disease-directed therapy.[2] [11]
Particular attention should also be made to the patient's diet, past and current medications, and habits
(e.g., smoking, alcohol, illicit drug use).
Physical exam
Vital signs such as heart rate, blood pressure, respiration rate, and oxygen saturation should be
measured and monitored. On physical examination, patients present with pulmonary rales, distended
neck veins, a positive hepatojugular reflux, and lower extremity edema. An S3 or S4 gallop and/or
hepatomegaly may be noted.
Score-based algorithms
Score-based algorithms for the diagnosis of HFpEF are available to help discriminate HFpEF from other
causes of dyspnea.[60] The H₂FPEF score estimates the probability of HFpEF using obesity, atrial
fibrillation, age >60 years, treatment with ≥2 antihypertensives, echocardiographic E/e’ ratio >9, and
echocardiographic pulmonary artery systolic pressure >35 mmHg as predictive variables. Low (0 or
1) and high (6 to 9) scores indicate low and high likelihood of HFpEF, respectively, and those with an
intermediate score may require additional evaluation and testing.[61] The HFA-PEFF diagnostic algorithm
was developed by the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and uses
a stepwise approach.[62] Initially, a pretest assesses for heart failure symptoms and signs, typical clinical
demographics (obesity, hypertension, diabetes, elderly, atrial fibrillation), and diagnostic laboratory tests
(ECG and echocardiography). In the absence of overt noncardiac causes of dyspnea, HFpEF can be
suspected if left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) is normal, there is no significant heart valve disease
or cardiac ischemia, and there is at least one typical risk factor. The next step involves comprehensive
echocardiography and serum natriuretic peptide levels from which a score is calculated that indicates
probability of HFpEF. Those with an intermediate score may require additional functional testing.
The ESC heart failure guidelines acknowledge that, depending on which score is used, different patients
will be referred for additional testing or diagnosed with HFpEF, and that not all centers will have access
to the specialized tests recommended by these algorithms.[4] The ESC guidelines therefore recommend
a simplified diagnostic approach based on symptoms and signs of heart failure, LVEF ≥50%, and
objective evidence of cardiac structural and/or functional abnormalities consistent with the presence of
left ventricular diastolic dysfunction/raised left ventricular filling pressures, including raised natriuretic
peptides.[4] The American College of Cardiology suggests that the H₂FPEF score may be more practical
and useful in clinical practice than HFA-PEFF, with evidence of greater accuracy, but notes that a low
H₂FPEF score in the context of HF symptoms and signs should not be used to exclude a diagnosis of
HFpEF.[2]
Initial investigations
The first tests to perform in patients presenting with suspected heart failure are a 12-lead ECG, chest
radiograph, blood tests, including natriuretic peptides (e.g., N-terminal prohormone B-natriuretic peptide
[NT-proBNP]), and an echocardiogram. In patients with suspected HFpEF, an echocardiogram (including
Doppler flow studies) should be performed to confirm or refute the diagnosis, categorize whether it is
HFpEF or HFrEF, and exclude significant valvular, infiltrative myocardial and pericardial abnormalities.
It should be noted that the presence of abnormal diastolic function on echocardiogram and elevated
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
NT-proBNP levels are very useful in establishing a diagnosis of HFpEF, but in appropriate clinical
circumstances their absence should not be used to exclude this diagnosis. Some patients with HFpEF
may have normal BNP levels, or levels below the typical threshold for diagnosis.[63] In one study, normal
BNP levels were present in 29% of symptomatic outpatients with HFpEF who had elevated pulmonary
capillary wedge pressures.[64] Additionally, some patients may only have elevated pulmonary artery
pressure with exercise, hence in these patients exercise hemodynamic assessment with right heart
catheterization has been recommended to establish a diagnosis of HFpEF.[11]
ECG
• 12-lead ECG may reveal left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, evidence of prior myocardial infarction,
conduction defects, arrhythmias common to HFpEF such as atrial fibrillation, and low voltage
suggestive of an infiltrative cardiomyopathy. It is very unusual for patients with heart failure to have
a normal 12-lead ECG.
Blood tests
• Serum electrolytes may show hypervolemic hyponatremia, which is common in severe heart failure
due to expansion of extracellular volume. Potassium levels are usually normal, but use of thiazide
diuretics may result in hypokalemia.
• Renal function tests may be normal or may show increased creatinine and decreased estimated
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR; e.g., in patients with long-standing hypertension, diabetes, or
infiltrative diseases such as amyloidosis).
• Complete blood count with iron levels (transferrin saturation) and ferritin is recommended.[3] [4]
Anemia can contribute to the patient's symptoms.
• Blood glucose, thyroid function tests, and blood lipids are useful to assess for commonly associated
comorbid disease.
• Liver aminotransaminases (aspartate transaminase/alanine transaminase) may be elevated if there
is liver congestion.
• Natriuretic peptides are sensitive markers of heart failure and can help differentiate the etiology
of dyspnea between heart failure and a noncardiac cause.[3] [4] However, BNP alone is unable to
show a distinction between HFpEF and HFrEF. Causes of elevated BNP other than heart failure
include left ventricular hypertrophy, myocardial ischemia, tachycardia, right ventricular overload,
hypoxemia (including from pulmonary embolism), renal dysfunction (eGFR <60 mL/minute), sepsis,
COPD, diabetes, age >70 years, and cirrhosis. Causes of a low BNP include obesity and patients
already treated with diuretics, ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers, or angiotensin-II receptor antagonists.
Elevated BNP and NT-pro-BNP levels are associated with higher cardiovascular events in heart
failure patients.[65] BNP levels are lower in patients with HFpEF than in patients with heart failure
with reduced LVEF, but for a given BNP level, the prognosis in patients with HFpEF is as poor
as in those with reduced LVEF.[66] Levels of BNP and NT-proBNP may be lower in patients with
obesity; therefore, diagnostic sensitivity may be reduced in these patients.[2] [3] Additionally, use of
sacubitril/valsartan (angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor) may elevate levels of BNP, and use of
NT-proBNP may be preferred in this case.[67] 
Echocardiography
• Transthoracic echocardiography can be used to establish the structure and function of the left
ventricle and whether there is any other pathology that might explain the patients’ presentation,
such as valvular disease or pericardial disease.[3] [4]
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
• Using echocardiography, it is possible to measure whether there is left ventricular hypertrophy (LV
wall thickness is normally 7-12 mm) and/or left atrial dilatation. Patients with HFpEF usually have
left atrial enlargement, elevated LV mass, and increased LV relative wall thickness.
• Echocardiography can also be used to assess the filling pressures in the heart. The peak velocity
across the mitral valve during early diastolic filling corresponds to the E wave. A is the transmitral
flow during atrial contraction and corresponds to the A wave. The velocity of the E wave is
determined by the balance between the rate of relaxation and the pressure gradient between the
left atrium and the left ventricle in early diastole. In normal individuals, a typical E/A ratio is 1.0 to
1.5.
• Doppler echocardiography is used to evaluate the characteristics of diastolic transmitral and
pulmonary venous flow pattern that are used to assess diastolic function. Tissue Doppler imaging
(TDI) seems to be less dependent on volume status compared with routine Doppler, and has been
used to aid in the diagnosis of diastolic dysfunction.
• TDI measures the change in velocity of the myocardial tissue itself during different phases of the
cardiac cycle. Mitral annular velocity (E') has been used as a marker of diastolic function and is less
preload-dependent than Doppler echocardiography.[68]
• E/e' is the ratio of peak velocity across the mitral valve during early diastolic filling on routine
Doppler echo and the mitral annular velocity on TDI. An E/e' ratio >15 is a reliable indicator of
elevated left atrial pressure, whereas a ratio of <8 is generally found to be associated with normal
filling pressure.[69]
• Stage I or mild diastolic impairment: E/A ratio <1.0 due to impaired relaxation and significant
contribution of atrial contraction to LV filling. Less filling of the LV in early diastole often results in
enhanced contraction of the left atrium and an attendant increase in A velocity, reducing the E/A
ratio. The E/e' ratio is generally normal.
• Stage II or moderate diastolic impairment: E/A is normal, but E/A reversal (ratio <1.0) occurs with
Valsalva maneuvers. Also called pseudo-normalization. This is due to reduced LV compliance,
resulting in increased left atrial (LA) pressure. The E/e' ratio is intermediate-to-elevated in this
situation.
• Stage III or severe diastolic impairment: abnormal E/A ratio (>2.0), but changes with Valsalva
maneuvers. Due to severe decrease in compliance, causing further increase in LA pressure. E/e'
ratio is high (i.e., >15).
• Stage IV (restrictive physiology): abnormal E/A ratio (>2.0) and remains fixed with Valsalva
maneuvers. E/e' ratio is high (i.e., >15).
• E- and A-wave velocities are affected by volume status, mitral valve dysfunction, and the presence
of atrial fibrillation, so that their proper interpretation must take many of these factors into
account.[69]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Impaired relaxation: mitral inflow showing E/A reversal
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
Pseudonormalization of E/A mitral inflow
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
Valsalva technique confirming impaired relaxation
From the collection of Dr Marc Del Rosario
Tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) of the basal LV showing increased E/E'
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Mitral inflow confirming restrictive filling
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
Chest x-ray
• Chest x-ray may show cardiomegaly, pulmonary edema, or pleural effusions, or may identify other
noncardiac causes of breathlessness; for example, pneumonia, oligemic lung field in pulmonary
embolism, or collapse lung in pneumothorax.
Subsequent investigations
Cardiac imaging remains pivotal to the diagnosis of HFpEF. The choice of further investigations depends
on local expertise. Practically, echocardiography is widely used, although it only offers an indirect
assessment of LV filling with no characterization of myocardial tissue. Patients who exhibit chest pain with
exertion or any symptom that is suspicious (e.g., an anginal equivalent) should be screened for CAD, as
ischemia may contribute to abnormalities in systolic and diastolic function.
Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging
• CMR imaging represents the gold standard in quantification of systolic function and is increasingly
used in the assessment of heart failure due to its unique, precise, noninvasive phenotypic
characterization with high reproducibility and sufficient spatial and temporal resolution.[70]
• CMR techniques to assess diastolic dysfunction can include measuring left atrial size, mitral inflow
pattern, pulmonary vein assessment, LV time volume relations, LV myocardial tagging, and flow
propagation velocity, calculating T1/myocardial fibrosis, and following injection of contrast. The
below image shows a CMR 4-chamber image following injection of gadolinium contrast. In the late
phase, normal myocardium should appear black (the valves appear white). In this image there is
a subendocardial basal enhancement in the left ventricle that is consistent with amyloid infiltration.
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
The next image is the same patient following contrast in the short axis at the basal level. In this
image there is an almost complete white ring that represents the late gadolinium enhancement.
CMR of patient with cardiac amyloid infiltration. Following injection of gadolinium contrast,
in the late phase there is subendocardial basal ring in the left ventricle (4-chamber view)
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
CMR of patient with cardiac amyloid infiltration. Following injection of gadolinium contrast, in
the late phase there is subendocardial basal ring in the left ventricle (short-axis basal image)
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
• CMR is also very useful for the diagnosis of pericardial disease causing heart failure (e.g.,
constrictive pericarditis).
Radionuclide imaging
• Radionuclide ventriculography (MUGA scan) can provide an assessment of LVEF, although it
cannot directly assess valvular abnormalities or cardiac hypertrophy.
Computed tomography coronary angiography (CTCA)
• Other techniques such as computed tomography angiography CTCA may be considered in patients
with suspected coronary artery disease (CAD) or pericardial disease.
Stress testing
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
• Stress testing may be done using exercise (e.g., treadmill, bicycle) or pharmacologic (e.g.,
adenosine, dobutamine) methods. Exercise testing is preferred as it provides diagnostic and
prognostic information from the patient's exercise capacity. Imaging techniques add to the
sensitivity of the test. Depending on local expertise, patients can have stress echocardiography,
perfusion CMR, or nuclear myocardial perfusion imaging with single photon emission computerized
tomography.
• Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) can help to confirm reduced exercise capacity and can
also differentiate between cardiac and noncardiac causes of unexplained dyspnea.[3] [4]
Cardiac catheterization
• Cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography remain the diagnostic standard in diagnosing
CAD. It may be performed in patients who have a high pretest likelihood of CAD and those who
have a stress test showing ischemia.
• An increase in pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) of >15 mmHg at rest or >25 mmHg
with exercise during right heart catheterization is considered diagnostic for heart failure.[11]
Other investigations for comorbidities and causes
Additional investigations for underlying causative factors and comorbidities e.g. hypertension, coronary
artery disease, diabetes, atrial fibrillation, obesity, and renal dysfunction should be carried out and treated
accordingly. See separate topics for details.
• Essential hypertension
• Stable ischemic heart disease
• Type 2 diabetes mellitus in adults
• Established atrial fibrillation
• Obesity in adults
• Chronic kidney disease
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
exertional dyspnea (common)
• Exertional dyspnea is common in patients with HFpEF but is not unique to heart failure, and so it is
crucial to take a detailed history and comprehensive assessment of patients with dyspnea.[58]
Other diagnostic factors
orthopnea (common)
• Orthopnoea is defined as dyspnea in the recumbent position that usually occurs within a few minutes
after recumbency while the patient is awake. This is a nonspecific symptom, as it may occur in any
condition that causes a reduced pulmonary vital capacity.
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (common)
• Dyspnea that occurs while a patient is asleep, waking up suddenly with a feeling of suffocation.
• It is more specific to heart failure than orthopnea.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
abdominal fullness (common)
• Swelling or pain in the upper abdomen is caused by fluid retention and hepatic/intestinal congestion.
Some patients notice their clothes feel tighter or that they struggle to do up their pants.
• Related to abdominal congestion.
rales (common)
• Usually bilateral and in the basal segments. If unilateral, it is usually on the right side and associated
with a pleural effusion. It is important to rule out lung pathology such as an infection, consolidation, or
interstitial fibrosis.
jugular venous distention (common)
• This is measured at a 45-degree angle, jugular venous pressure above 5 cm from the sternal angle is
considered elevated, and roughly corresponds to a right atrial pressure of 10 cmH₂0.
hepatojugular reflux (common)
• Jugular venous pressure may be normal at rest, but rises to abnormal levels with increased right upper
quadrant pressure by the maneuver of firm pressure over the liver.
congestive hepatomegaly (common)
• Usually develops before overt edema occurs and is associated with abnormal liver function tests.
lower extremity edema (common)
• Usually bilateral and pitting. This results in reduced mobility as patients find walking very difficult. In
some patients, there is sacral edema or even edema in the lumbar or thoracic region. Patients with
such extensive edema normally need to be admitted for intravenous diuretic therapy.
laterally displaced apical impulse (common)
• A laterally displaced apical impulse on physical examination suggests cardiomegaly.
gallop sounds (uncommon)
• An S3 gallop, which occurs after the second heart sound, has been shown to be an independent
predictor of death and hospitalization due to heart failure. An S4 is heard in patients with hypertensive
heart disease, which is usually the setting for diastolic dysfunction. However, it is nonspecific, as it may
be heard in a variety of other conditions, including coronary artery disease.
Risk factors
Strong
hypertension
• Hypertension is the most important risk factor for HFpEF, with a prevalence of 60% to 89%.[2] [4]
 It is a more common comorbidity in patients who have HFpEF than in those with reduced ejection
fraction (HFrEF).[16] Abnormalities of left ventricular diastolic filling have been noted in adult patients
with isolated diastolic, isolated systolic, and combined systolic and diastolic hypertension.[25]
Changes in intrinsic myocardial stiffness, myocardial fibrosis with interstitial collagen deposition, and
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
altered chamber geometry are other possible mechanisms for diastolic dysfunction in patients with
hypertension.[25]
• Hypertension is associated with left atrial enlargement, depression of atrial contractile function, and
increased risk for atrial fibrillation, which contributes to heart failure (HF).
atrial fibrillation (AF)
• AF and HF are often comorbid, and either may cause or exacerbate the other.[4] It is more common
in patients who have HFpEF than in those with HFrEF.[2] AF increases the risk of thrombo-embolic
events (e.g., stroke) and may lead to a worsening of symptoms. Development of atrial fibrillation in
patients with HF is associated with a worse prognosis; however, those who develop atrial fibrillation
first may have a more favorable clinical course.[4] [26]
• Atrial systole contributes up to 40% of diastolic filling, so atrial fibrillation with a resultant loss of "atrial
kick" can precipitate overt HF in patients with underlying ventricular diastolic dysfunction.[25] [27] [28]
female sex
• HFpEF is more common in women (79%); heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) is more
common in men.[16] [17] [29]
age >70 years
• Patients >70 years of age are more likely to have HFpEF than heart failure with a reduced ejection
fraction.[30] The mean age of patients with HFpEF ranges from 60 to 78 years.[31] In the general
population, the proportion with diastolic dysfunction sharply increases after age 65 years in both
sexes.[32]
obesity
• Up to 80% of people with HFpEF are reported to be overweight or have obesity.[2] Obesity is one of
the strongest risk factors for HFpEF; it is both an independent risk factor and is also associated with
other comorbidities, such as hypertension and diabetes.[2] Obesity is associated with left ventricular
(LV) hypertrophic remodeling, increased myocardial stiffness, and ventricular dysfunction.[33] In
children and adolescents, obesity (measured by BMI) with impaired LV diastolic function.[34] Central
obesity, as measured by waist-hip ratio, correlates better with diastolic function and mortality than
BMI.[35]
coronary artery disease (CAD)/ischemia
• CAD is one of the most important risk factors for HF, particularly HFrEF, and is also a common
comorbidity in patients with HFpEF.[2] [36] In the ARIC (Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities) study,
CAD was found to be a significant risk factor for incident HFpEF after adjustment for demographics
and common comorbidities.[36] Patients with suggestive symptoms should be assessed for possible
coronary disease as a cause of HF and to guide management.[2]
diabetes mellitus
• Approximately 45% of patients with HFpEF have diabetes mellitus, and the prevalence is reported
to be increasing most significantly in those with new-onset HFpEF.[37] The presence of comorbid
diabetes in patients with HFpEF is associated with an increased risk of morbidity and mortality
compared with those without diabetes.[37] [38]
• Both type 1 and type 2 diabetes increase the risk of developing HF across the entire range of glucose
levels; however, HF may be more prevalent in people with type 1 compared with type 2 diabetes.[39]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
chronic kidney disease (CKD)
• CKD is a risk factor for HFpEF and the presence of comorbid CKD in people those with HFpEF is
associated with increased morbidity and mortality.[40] [41] HFpEF and CKD share common risk
factors, such as hypertension, obesity, and diabetes, and have similar pathophysiology.[42] [43]
dyslipidemia
• Lipid abnormalities have been linked to increased risk for HF; they are common comorbidities.[44]
exposure to cardiotoxic agents
• Chemotherapeutic agents, particularly anthracyclines (e.g., doxorubicin, daunorubicin), are associated
with an increased risk of HF.[45]
metabolic syndrome or cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic (CKM) syndrome
• Metabolic syndrome is a cluster of common conditions, including insulin resistance, impaired
glucose tolerance, abdominal obesity, reduced high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol levels, elevated
triglycerides, and hypertension. Metabolic syndrome and the individual components are risk factors for
development and progression of HF.[46] CKM syndrome is a disorder defined by the American Heart
Association (AHA) to reflect the connections between metabolic disease (obesity, diabetes, metabolic
syndrome), kidney disease, and cardiovascular disease (CVD).[47] [48] It includes both individuals
at risk for CVD (due to the presence of metabolic risk factors, CKD, or both) and individuals with
existing CVD. Poor CKM health affects nearly all organ systems and is associated with cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality. The AHA has proposed a CKM syndrome staging system based on patient
risk factors and opportunities for prevention and care. The AHA recommends that these patients are
managed by an interdisciplinary team with targeted referral of high-risk CKM patients to appropriate
subspecialists.[47]
Weak
myocardial and pericardial disorders
• These conditions decrease left ventricular compliance and impair relaxation, thus increasing left
ventricular filling pressures.
obstructive sleep apnea
• About 55% of patients with symptomatic HFpEF have sleep-disordered breathing, mostly obstructive
sleep apnea.[49] Patients with obstructive sleep apnea have more impaired diastolic parameters as
measured by tissue Doppler velocity.[50] [51]
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
serum electrolytes
• Hypervolemic hyponatremia is common in severe heart failure due to
expansion of extracellular volume.
• Potassium levels are usually normal, but thiazide and loop diuretics
may result in hypokalemia.
hypervolemic
hyponatremia;
hypokalemia may be
present
renal function tests
• Abnormal renal function tests may indicate presence of comorbidities,
such as long-standing hypertension or diabetes, or other causes,
such as amyloidosis.
normal or increased
creatinine, decreased
estimated glomerular
filtration rate
liver enzymes
• Marker of passive liver congestion.
elevated aspartate
transaminase, elevated
alanine transaminase
B-natriuretic peptide (BNP)/N-terminal prohormone B-natriuretic
peptide (NT-proBNP)
• BNP or NT-proBNP are raised in patients with heart failure, with
concentrations rising in line with the severity of symptoms (New
York Heart Association class). In patients presenting with dyspnea,
natriuretic peptide biomarkers should be measured to help in the
diagnosis of heart failure.[3] [4]
• Causes of elevated natriuretic peptides other than heart failure
include left ventricular hypertrophy, myocardial ischemia, tachycardia,
right ventricular overload, hypoxemia, renal dysfunction, sepsis,
COPD, diabetes, age >70 years, and cirrhosis.
• The presence of elevated natriuretic peptides (BNP ≥35 picograms/
mL or NT-proBNP ≥125 picograms/mL) alongside other evidence
of structural heart disease make the diagnosis of heart failure more
likely. Higher cutoffs for natriuretic peptide levels are recommended
in older people or in patients with atrial fibrillation or chronic kidney
disease. Levels of BNP and NT-proBNP may be lower in patients
with obesity; therefore, diagnostic sensitivity may be reduced in these
patients.[2] [3] Additionally, use of sacubitril/valsartan (angiotensin
receptor-neprilysin inhibitor) may elevate levels of BNP, and use
of NT-proBNP may be preferred in this case.[67] The presence of
normal NP levels should not be used to exclude diagnosis.[11]
• It is important to note the units for NT-proBNP especially when
managing referrals from community settings, as some labs use
picomoles/L (pmol/L) and others use picograms/mL (pg/mL).
Conversation tables need to be used.
elevated
CBC and iron studies
• Complete blood count with iron levels (transferrin saturation) and
ferritin is recommended. Anemia can contribute to the patient's
symptoms.
• Trial data suggest that iron deficiency should be defined as ferritin
<100 nanograms/mL, or 100-300 nanograms/mL if transferrin
saturation is <20%.[71] [72] The European Society of Cardiology
recommends that all patients with heart failure should be screened
for iron deficiency.[4]
ferritin <100 ng/mL
or 100-300 ng/mL if
transferrin saturation is
<20%
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
12-lead ECG
• Screening for comorbid cardiovascular disease. May reveal evidence
of prior myocardial infarction, conduction defects, and arrhythmias
common to HFpEF, such as atrial fibrillation. Increased QRS voltage
may infer the presence of left ventricular hypertrophy; low QRS
voltage can suggest infiltrative cardiomyopathy.
left ventricular
hypertrophy, atrial
fibrillation, low
voltage in infiltrative
cardiomyopathy
blood glucose
• Screening for diabetes mellitus as a comorbid condition.
elevated in diabetes
thyroid function tests
• Screening for comorbid hypo- or hyperthyroidism. Both can be a
primary or contributory cause of heart failure.
primary hypothyroidism:
elevated thyroid-
stimulating hormone
(TSH), decreased
free thyroxine (FT4);
hyperthyroidism:
decreased TSH, elevated
free triiodothyronine,
elevated FT4
blood lipids
• Screening for comorbid dyslipoproteinemias/metabolic syndrome.
elevated in dyslipidemia;
decreased in end-stage
heart failure, especially
in the presence of cardiac
cachexia
CXR
• The finding of cardiomegaly is helpful in the diagnosis.
• Chest x-ray also helps evaluate for pulmonary causes of dyspnea
(e.g., pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax). In the
presence of fluid overload, pulmonary edema or pleural effusion is a
typical finding.
cardiomegaly, pulmonary
edema, pleural effusion
transthoracic echocardiography
• Echocardiography can be used to establish the structure and function
of the left ventricle and whether there is any other pathology that
might explain the patients’ presentation, such as valvular disease or
pericardial disease.
• Using echo, it is possible to measure whether there is left ventricular
hypertrophy (LV wall thickness is normally 7-12 mm) and/or left atrial
dilatation.
• Echo can also be used to assess the filling pressures in the heart.
The peak velocity across the mitral valve during early diastolic filling
corresponds to the E wave. A is the transmitral flow during atrial
contraction and corresponds to the A wave. The velocity of the E
wave is determined by the balance between the rate of relaxation and
the pressure gradient between the left atrium and the left ventricle in
early diastole. In normal individuals, a typical E/A ratio is 1.0 to 1.5.
• Tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) measures the change in velocity of
the myocardial tissue itself during different phases of the cardiac
cycle. Mitral annular velocity (E') has been used as a marker of
diastolic function and is less preload-dependent than Doppler
echocardiography.[68]
• E/e' is the ratio of peak velocity across the mitral valve during early
diastolic filling on routine Doppler echo and the mitral annular velocity
on TDI. An E/e' ratio >15 is a reliable indicator of elevated left atrial
assessment of LV
structure and function;
the presence of LV
hypertrophy or left atrial
dilatation; abnormal E/
A ratio (normal E/A = 1.0
to 1.5); E/e’ ratio may be
normal, intermediate, or
high indicating the LV
filling pressures
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
Test Result
pressure, whereas a ratio of <8 is generally found to be associated
with normal filling pressure.[69] 
• Stage I or mild diastolic impairment: E/A ratio <1.0 due to impaired
relaxation and significant contribution of atrial contraction to LV
filling. Less filling of the LV in early diastole often results in enhanced
contraction of the left atrium and an attendant increase in A velocity,
reducing the E/A ratio. The E/e' ratio is generally normal.
• Stage II or moderate diastolic impairment: E/A is normal, but E/A
reversal (ratio <1.0) occurs with Valsalva maneuvers. Also called
pseudo-normalization. This is due to reduced LV compliance,
resulting in increased left atrial (LA) pressure. The E/e' ratio is
intermediate-to-elevated in this situation.
• Stage III or severe diastolic impairment: abnormal E/A ratio (>2.0),
but changes with Valsalva maneuvers. Due to severe decrease in
compliance, causing further increase in LA pressure. E/e' ratio is high
(i.e., >15).
• Stage IV (restrictive physiology): abnormal E/A ratio (>2.0) and
remains fixed with Valsalva maneuvers. E/e' ratio is high (i.e., >15).
• E- and A-wave velocities are affected by volume status, mitral valve
dysfunction, and the presence of atrial fibrillation, so that their proper
interpretation must take many of these factors into account.[69]
Impaired relaxation: mitral inflow showing E/A reversal
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
Pseudonormalization of E/A mitral inflow
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
Valsalva technique confirming impaired relaxation
From the collection of Dr Marc Del Rosario
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
Test Result
Tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) of the basal LV showing increased E/E'
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
Mitral inflow confirming restrictive filling
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Other tests to consider
Test Result
cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging
• Gold standard for evaluating left ventricular chamber size and
left ventricular mass, detecting right ventricular dysplasia, or
recognizing the presence of pericardial disease. CMR can help define
infiltrative causes of diastolic dysfunction, especially if employed with
gadolinium contrast looking for delayed enhancement.[70]
• Studies have shown that CMR has a high concordance with
echocardiography in measuring mitral inflow velocities and
myocardial tissue velocities, in both patients and controls.[73] [74]
CMR of patient with cardiac amyloid infiltration. Following
injection of gadolinium contrast, in the late phase there is
subendocardial basal ring in the left ventricle (4-chamber view)
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
abnormal cardiac systolic
and diastolic function
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
Test Result
CMR of patient with cardiac amyloid infiltration. Following
injection of gadolinium contrast, in the late phase there is
subendocardial basal ring in the left ventricle (short-axis basal image)
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
CMR (cardiac magnetic resonance) imaging demonstrating
restrictive cardiomyopathy with biatrial dilatation
and mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
CMR (cardiac magnetic resonance) imaging confirming left
atrial enlargement and left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH)
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
CT angiography
• May be used to diagnose coronary artery disease (CAD); may be
useful in evaluating chamber size and ventricular mass, detecting
may show CAD or
pericardial disease
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
Test Result
right ventricular dysplasia, or recognizing the presence of pericardial
disease.
radionuclide ventriculography (MUGA scan)
• In patients where image quality is poor on echocardiography,
radionuclide ventriculography can provide an assessment of left
ventricular ejection fraction (EF). However, it is unable to directly
assess valvular abnormalities and cardiac hypertrophy.
normal EF >50%
stress testing
• Evaluation for ischemic heart disease and inducible myocardial
ischemia is indicated in patients with HFpEF.[3] [4]
• May be done using exercise (e.g., treadmill, bicycle) or
pharmacologic (e.g., adenosine, dobutamine) methods.
• Depending on local expertise, stress echocardiography, cardiac
magnetic resonance perfusion, or single photon emission
computerized tomography can be used.
ischemia
cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET)
• Can help to confirm reduced exercise capacity and can also
differentiate between cardiac and noncardiac causes of unexplained
dyspnea.[3] [4]
reduced capacity
cardiac catheterization and coronary angiography
• May be used to diagnose or exclude coronary artery disease (CAD).
• Its invasive nature limits its clinical utility for exclusively diagnosing
HFpEF in day-to-day clinical practice. However, it should be
performed if the likelihood of CAD is high.
• Decision to perform this test should be made by a cardiologist due to
the risks of the procedure.
CAD: abnormal diastolic
parameters (relaxation
time constant or tau,
dP/dT, and LV diastolic
pressure)
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Heart failure with reduced
ejection fraction
• No differentiating signs or
symptoms.
• Echocardiogram and other
cardiac imaging (e.g.,
MRI) has a pivotal role in
measuring the left ventricular
ejection fraction.
Cardiac amyloidosis • No differentiating signs or
symptoms. Patient may have
an underlying condition (e.g.,
multiple myeloma).
• Investigations include
screening for monoclonal
protein by serum and
urine immunofixation
electrophoresis and serum
free light chains and 24-
hour urine collection for total
protein.[11] Cardiac MRI
and/or cardiac biopsy are
usually needed to confirm
cardiac amyloidosis.
Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM)
• Family history may be
present.
• No differentiating symptoms.
• Examination may reveal
murmur of LVOT obstruction.
• Echocardiography must be
performed to establish the
diagnosis of HCM, and will
typically show asymmetrical
septal hypertrophy. The
use of cardiac MRI may
increase the diagnostic
yield in patients with
suspected HCM who
have poor visualization
by echocardiogram of the
left ventricular walls or left
ventricular apex.
Cardiac sarcoidosis • Extracardiac disease may
be present (e.g., eye, lung
involvement).
• Heart block or arrhythmias
may be seen on ECG or
cardiac monitoring.
• Cardiac MRI may be useful
in identifying areas of
involvement.[11]
• (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) PET scan
demonstrates a
characteristic pattern of
uptake in sarcoidosis and
may aid in the diagnosis of
cardiac sarcoidosis.
• Endomyocardial biopsy may
be required.
Fabry disease • Family history (X-linked
inheritance).[11]
• May present with burning
limb pain, fever, abdominal
pain, and diarrhea. Presence
of rash in bathing suit
distribution.
• Serum alpha galactosidase
levels are absent or low
in men (can be normal in
women).
• Genetic testing (for GLA
mutation) can confirm
diagnosis.[11]
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
• Proteinuria may be present.
• Cutaneous lesions are seen,
such as angiokeratomas.
• Biopsy may be considered.
Hemochromatosis • Family history of
hemochromatosis and
related symptoms.[11]
• Fasting transferrin
saturation (>45%) is the
phenotypic hallmark of
hemochromatosis. Ferritin
is elevated. Cardiac MRI
with T2* imaging is used
to identify myocardial iron
accumulation.
• Diagnosis is confirmed by
HFE genetic testing.
Myocarditis • History of recent infection
(viral, bacterial, fungal).
• History of drug and toxin
exposures, such as
chemotherapy drugs (e.g.,
checkpoint inhibitors)
antibiotics, vaccinations
(e.g., smallpox, SARS-
CoV-2), cocaine.
• Endomyocardial biopsy is
the diagnostic standard for
establishing the diagnosis
of myocarditis. Cardiac MRI
may also be useful.
Pericardial disease/
constrictive pericarditis
• History of pericarditis,
pericardial effusion,
cardiac surgery, radiation
therapy.[11] Constrictive
pericarditis should be
suspected in a patient with
unexplained right heart
failure in whom there is a
history of pericardial disease
or predisposing pericardial
injury.
• Echocardiogram and cardiac
MRI can be useful.
• Cardiac catheterization may
show ventricular discordance
in LV/RV pressure tracing
during inspiration.[11]
High-output heart failure • History or physical
manifestations of
precipitating conditions
(e.g., anemia, arteriovenous
fistulas/malformations,
thyrotoxicosis, sepsis,
cirrhosis, thiamine
deficiency).
• Echocardiogram may show
4-chamber enlargement, or
increased flow through LVOT.
• CBC, thyroid function tests,
and blood cultures.
Obstructive lung disease • Dyspnea and orthopnea
may be present, but usually
not paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea. Usual precipitants
are allergens, environmental
triggers, and respiratory
infection.
• Pulmonary function testing
will show an obstructive
lung disease pattern, with or
without improvement after
using bronchodilators. This
is a helpful test in any patient
who is breathless, especially
if there is a smoking history.
• Doppler echocardiography
will reveal normal filling
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
parameters; E/e' ratio will not
be elevated in the absence
of coexistent left heart
disease.
Idiopathic pulmonary
arterial hypertension
• Can present with heart
failure symptoms. Blood
pressure is elevated or
history of high blood
pressure. Right heart
symptoms are peripheral
edema, hepatic congestion,
and raised jugular venous
pressure.
• Pulmonary pressures may
be indirectly measured by
Doppler echocardiography.
On echocardiography,
left ventricular function is
normal.
• The established standard
for diagnosis of pulmonary
hypertension is right heart
catheterization.
• Doppler echocardiography
will reveal normal filling
parameters; E/e' ratio will not
be elevated in the absence
of coexistent left heart
disease.
Noncardiogenic
pulmonary edema
• No differentiating signs
or symptoms. History of
high altitude, neurologic
event, post-transfusion or
pulmonary embolism
• Echocardiography shows
normal left ventricular
function. Chest x-ray shows
normal heart size.
• Doppler echocardiography
will reveal normal filling
parameters; E/e' ratio will not
be elevated in the absence
of co-/existent left heart
disease.
Criteria
Universal definition and classification of heart failure[1]
Definition
Heart failure is a clinical syndrome with current or prior:
• Symptoms and/or signs caused by a structural and/or functional cardiac abnormality
And corroborated by at least one of:
• Elevated natriuretic peptide levels
• Objective evidence of pulmonary or systemic congestion.
Stages of heart failure:
• At risk for heart failure (stage A): includes patients without current or prior symptoms or signs of heart
failure, structural cardiac changes, or elevated biomarkers of heart disease, but who are at risk for
heart failure
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
• Pre-heart failure (stage B): includes patients without current or prior symptoms or signs of heart failure,
but who have evidence of either structural heart disease, abnormal cardiac function, or elevated
natriuretic peptide or cardiac troponin
• Heart failure (stage C): includes patients with current or prior symptoms and/or signs of heart failure
caused by a structural and/or functional cardiac abnormality
• Advanced heart failure (stage D): includes patients with severe symptoms and/or signs of heart failure
at rest, recurrent hospitalizations despite guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT), refractory
or intolerant to GDMT, requiring advanced therapies such as consideration for transplantation,
mechanical circulatory support, or palliative care.
Classification of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF):
• Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF): symptomatic heart failure with LVEF ≤40%
• Heart failure with mildly reduced ejection fraction (HFmrEF): symptomatic heart failure with LVEF 41%
to 49% (previously labeled as heart failure with mid-range ejection fraction)
• Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF): symptomatic heart failure with LVEF ≥50%
• Heart failure with improved ejection fraction (HFimpEF): symptomatic heart failure with a baseline
LVEF ≤40%, a ≥10-point increase from baseline LVEF, and a second measurement of LVEF >40%.
American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology/Heart
Failure Society of America[3]
Stages of heart failure:
• At risk for heart failure (stage A): includes patients who do not have current or prior symptoms or signs
of heart failure, structural or functional cardiac changes, or abnormal biomarkers, but who are at risk
for heart failure (e.g., hypertension, cardiovascular disease, obesity, family history or genetic variant
for cardiomyopathy, exposure to cardiotoxic agents)
• Pre-heart failure (stage B): includes patients who do not have current or prior symptoms or signs of
heart failure, but who do have evidence of either structural heart disease; increased filling pressures;
or risk factors with either elevated natriuretic peptide or cardiac troponin in the absence of competing
diagnoses
• Symptomatic heart failure (stage C): includes patients with current or prior symptoms and/or signs of
heart failure
• Advanced heart failure (stage D): includes patients with marked symptoms of heart failure that
interfere with daily life and with recurrent hospitalizations despite attempts to optimize GDMT.
HFpEF: LVEF ≥50% with evidence of spontaneous or provokable increased LV filling pressures (e.g.,
elevated natriuretic peptide, noninvasive and invasive hemodynamic measurement). Suggested thresholds
for evidence of increased filling pressures:
• Average E/e′ ≥15
• Septal e′ <7 cm/s
• Lateral e′ <10 cm/s
• TR velocity >2.8 m/s
• Estimated PA systolic pressure >35 mmHg
• BNP ≥35 picograms/mL*
• NT-pro-BNP ≥125 picograms/mL*
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
*Cutoffs provided for natriuretic peptide levels may have lower specificity, especially in older patients or in
patients with atrial fibrillation or chronic kidney disease. Usually, higher cutoff values are recommended for
the diagnosis of heart failure in these patients.
2021 European Society of Cardiology Guidelines for the diagnosis
and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure[4]
Diagnostic criteria for HFpEF:
1. Symptoms and signs of heart failure
2. An LVEF ≥50%*
3. Objective evidence of cardiac structural and/or functional abnormalities consistent with the presence of
LV diastolic dysfunction/raised LV filling pressures, including raised natriuretic peptides
• LV mass index ≥95 g/m² (female), ≥115 g/m² (male)
• Relative wall thickness >0.42
• LA volume index >34 mL/m² (sinus rhythm)
• E/e’ ratio at rest >9
• NT-pro-BNP >125 (sinus rhythm) or >365 (atrial fibrillation) picograms/mL
• BNP >35 (sinus rhythm) or >105 (atrial fibrillation) picograms/mL
• PA systolic pressure >35 mmHg
• TR velocity at rest >2.8 m/s
*Patients with a history of overtly reduced LVEF (≤40%),who later present with LVEF ≥50%, should be
considered to have recovered HFrEF or "heart failure with improved LVEF" (rather than HFpEF).
New York Heart Association functional classification[59]
Provides an easy way to classify patients depending on their physical limitations and has been documented
to predict prognosis.[75]
• Class I: cardiac disease without limitation of physical activity; ordinary physical activity does not cause
undue fatigue, palpitations, or dyspnea
• Class II: cardiac disease resulting in slight limitation of physical activity; comfortable at rest; ordinary
physical activity results in fatigue, palpitations, or dyspnea
• Class III: cardiac disease resulting in marked limitation of physical activity; comfortable at rest; gentle
activity causes fatigue, palpitations, or dyspnea
• Class IV: cardiac disease resulting in inability to carry out any physical activity without discomfort;
symptoms of heart failure at rest; if any physical activity is undertaken, discomfort increases.
Framingham criteria for the diagnosis of congestive HF[76]
The Framingham criteria for the diagnosis of congestive HF were established before the widespread use of
echocardiographic assessment of systolic and diastolic dysfunction. The Framingham clinical criteria have
been extremely useful for identifying patients with HF, both in clinical practice and in epidemiologic studies,
for more than 40 years. However, because their specificity is greater than their sensitivity, it is recognized
that they probably miss mild cases of HF. In order to come up with a definite diagnosis of congestive HF, one
needs to have either two major criteria or the combination of one major and two minor criteria.
Major criteria:
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Diagnosis
• Neck vein distension
• Rales
• Acute pulmonary edema
• S3 gallop
• Increased venous pressure greater than 16 cm of water
• Circulation time greater than 25 seconds
• Hepatojugular reflux
• Cardiomegaly
• Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea or orthopnea.
Minor criteria:
• Ankle edema
• Night cough
• Dyspnea on exertion
• Hepatomegaly
• Pleural effusion
• Less than one third maximum vital capacity
• Tachycardia (heart rate >120 bpm).
Major or minor criteria:
• Weight loss greater than 4.5 kg in 5 days in response to treatment.
Screening
There is no evidence to support screening for HFpEF in the general asymptomatic population; however,
meticulous attention to cardiovascular risk factor modification is crucial at every physician review.
Echocardiography should be performed only in the appropriate clinical scenario when signs and symptoms
of heart failure are present or when underlying structural heart disease is suspected or needs to be excluded
(e.g., hypertension). Clinical evaluation is paramount in screening these patients.
Risk factors: comorbidities and causes
Screening for risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes, and obesity should be performed in accordance
with individual guidelines for these conditions. Since risk factor modification is crucial to the management of
HFpEF, screening for these risk factors is encouraged.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
Approach
Goals of treatment of HFpEF are to:
• Alleviate symptoms
• Improve cardiac function, functional capacity and quality of life
• Reduce hospitalizations
Management of HFpEF is focused on reducing congestion, identification and treatment of underlying causes
and comorbidities, implementing lifestyle disease-modifying therapy, and measures where appropriate
(exercise, diet, weight control).[2] [3] [4] [5]
The following recommendations cover ongoing management of HFpEF. For details of management of acute
exacerbation of heart failure, see Acute heart failure .
For details of management of HFpEF mimics, see separate topics.
Lifestyle measures
Lifestyle changes, dietary and nutritional modifications, exercise training, and health maintenance have
the potential to reduce heart failure (HF) progression.[82] Weight loss should be promoted in patients who
are overweight.
Exercise training or regular physical activity is recommended to improve function and quality of life.[3]
[83][84] [85] [86] Cardiac rehabilitation, which includes medical evaluation, education on adherence to
medication, advice on diet, psychosocial support, and an exercise training and physical activity program
can also be recommended to improve function, exercise tolerance, and quality of life. US guidelines
advise that patients who are on optimal guideline-directed medical treatment for HF, in stable medical
condition, and able to participate in an exercise program are candidates for an exercise rehabilitation
program.[3] There is developing evidence to support home-based cardiac rehabilitation alternatives to
center-based programs.[87] [88] [89]
Dietary sodium intake is an easily modifiable factor. There is limited evidence for sodium restriction in
patients with heart failure; however, guidelines recommend that excessive sodium intake should be
avoided.[3] [4][81][90] Tobacco and alcohol discontinuation should be encouraged.
Treatment of underlying causes and comorbidities
Screen for and manage underlying causes and comorbidities of HFpEF, such as hypertension, ischemic
heart disease, dyslipidemia, atrial fibrillation, diabetes, chronic kidney disease (CKD), obesity, and sleep
apnea.[2] [5] Consult your local drug information source for details of cautions, contraindications, and
dose adjustments that may be required in the presence of comorbid conditions.
See “Considerations for management of specific comorbidities” section below for more information on
management of HFpEF with specific comorbidities.
Pharmacotherapy
Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors
• SGLT2 inhibitors (e.g., dapagliflozin, empagliflozin) are recommended for patients with HFpEF to
decrease heart failure hospitalizations and cardiovascular mortality.[2] [3] [5][91] [92] 
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
• The EMPEROR-Preserved trial found that empagliflozin reduced the combined risk of
cardiovascular death or hospitalization for heart failure in patients with HFpEF, regardless of the
presence or absence of diabetes, and across the spectrum of baseline kidney function compared
with placebo.[93] [94] [95] [96] Effects were sustained for 1-3 years of treatment and reversed after
withdrawal.[97] Patients who received empagliflozin also had an early and sustained reduction in
risk and severity of a broad range of inpatient and outpatient events, such as a decrease in the
need for hospitalizations requiring aggressive therapy, a decrease of worsening events requiring
intensification of diuretics, and an increased likelihood of functional class improvement.[98] Health-
related quality of life was also improved.[99] The effects were similar in women and men, and seen
across a broad age spectrum.[100] [101] The effects were also similar regardless of background
diuretic use and empagliflozin was also associated with a reduced likelihood of diuretic initiation
or dose escalation and an increased likelihood of diuretic de-escalation and discontinuation after
randomization.[102]
• The PRESERVED-HF trial compared dapagliflozin with placebo in patients with HFpEF and
found that 12 weeks of dapagliflozin treatment significantly improved patient-reported symptoms,
physical limitations, and exercise function, and was well tolerated in chronic HFpEF.[103] [104]
 The DELIVER trial found that dapagliflozin reduced the combined risk of worsening heart failure or
cardiovascular death among patients with heart failure and a mildly reduced or preserved ejection
fraction, both in those with and without history of recent heart failure hospitalization, across the
spectrum of baseline kidney function and glycemic range, and regardless of the duration of heart
failure.[105] [106] [107] [108] [109] [110] [111] [112] [113] [114] The effects were also similar
regardless of background diuretic use and dapagliflozin was also associated with a reduced
likelihood of diuretic initiation.[115] Overall health status, as reported by KCCQ, was improved with
dapagliflozin.[116] [117] Improvements in symptoms, physical function, and quality of life were
larger in patients with the greatest level of frailty.[118] The efficacy and safety of dapagliflozin
was also found to be consistent across the spectrum of BMI, with a larger absolute effect seen in
patients with obesity.[119] In a pooled analysis of the DELIVER (patients with HFpEF) and DAPA-
HF (patients with HFrEF) trials, the response to dapagliflozin was similar between men and women
across the range of ejection fraction.[120]
• Meta-analyses have shown that SGLT2 inhibitors reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and
hospitalizations for heart failure in a broad range of patients with heart failure.[121] [122] [123] [124]
 In one meta-analysis of 15 randomized trials involving 20,241 patients with heart failure, SGLT2
inhibitors significantly reduced all-cause and cardiovascular mortality compared with placebo,
and the composite of cardiovascular mortality or hospitalizations/urgent visits for heart failure was
reduced with SGLT2 inhibitors across subgroups of sex, age, race, estimated glomerular filtration
rate (eGFR), functional class, and ejection fraction.[122] Another meta-analysis found that in
HFpEF and HFmrEF, SGLT2 inhibitors, angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors, and aldosterone
antagonists were associated with a significant decrease in the risk of heart failure hospitalization
compared with placebo, with SGLT2 inhibitors the optimal drug class in terms of reducing the
risk for heart failure hospitalization.[125] Combining data from three randomized controlled trials
(PRESERVED-HF, DEFINE-HF [Dapagliflozin effect on symptoms and biomarkers in patients with
heart failure], and CHIEF-HF [A study on impact of canagliflozin on health status, quality of life,
and functional status in heart failure] found that treatment with an SGLT2i resulted in health status
improvements for both black and white patients with heart failure.[126]
Diuretics
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
• All patients with signs of congestion should receive diuretics to relieve symptoms and prevent
worsening heart failure.[2] [3] [4][5] 
• Loop diuretics used for the treatment of heart failure and congestion include furosemide,
bumetanide, and torsemide. The most commonly used agent appears to be furosemide, but some
patients may respond more favorably to another loop diuretic. In treatment resistance, loop diuretics
should be combined with a thiazide diuretic (e.g., chlorothiazide, hydrochlorothiazide) or a thiazide-
like diuretic (e.g., metolazone, indapamide).
• Careful monitoring of renal function and electrolytes is essential. The minimum dose of diuretic
should be used to relieve congestion, keep the patient asymptomatic, and maintain a dry weight.
Some patients may be able to come off the diuretics completely, but they need very close long-term
follow-up.
Aldosterone antagonists
• US guidelines recommend that aldosterone antagonists (e.g., spironolactone, eplerenone) should
be considered in patients with HFpEF with and without congestion particularly among those with
lower LVEF.[2] [3] For patients with HFpEF and congestion, an aldosterone antagonist can be
started upfront with or without loop diuretics.[11]
• One Cochrane review found that aldosterone antagonists in HFpEF have a modest beneficial effect
in reducing heart failure hospitalization, but they probably have little or no effect on cardiovascular
mortality and quality of life.[127]
• The TOPCAT trial compared spironolactone with placebo in patients with HFpEF (EF 45% or
more) and found no significant difference in the primary end point, a composite of death from
cardiovascular causes, aborted cardiac arrest, or hospitalization for heart failure.[128] The trial
included participants in the US, Canada, Brazil, Argentina, Russia, and Georgia. Post-hoc analysis
suggested that there were clinical benefits with spironolactone in patients with HFpEF from the
Americas, with a significant reduction in the primary end point. In Russia and Georgia, all clinical
event rates were markedly lower, and there was no detectable impact of spironolactone on any
outcomes.[129] Further post-hoc analysis by ejection fraction showed the potential efficacy of
spironolactone was greatest at the lower end of the LVEF spectrum.[130]
• Spironolactone and eplerenone can both cause hyperkalemia, and precautions should be taken to
minimize the risk; regular monitoring of serum potassium and renal function is recommended.[3]
Angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor (ARNi)
• US guidelines recommend that sacubitril/valsartan may be considered for selected patients with
HFpEF, particularly among those with lower LVEF.[2] [3]
• One Cochrane review found that ARNi treatment in HFpEF has a modest beneficial effect in
reducing heart failure hospitalization, but probably has little or no effect on cardiovascular mortality
and quality of life.[127]
• The PARAGON-HF trial compared sacubitril/valsartan with valsartan alone in patients with HFpEF
(EF 45% or more) and found that sacubitril/valsartan did not achieve a significant reduction in
the primary composite end point of cardiovascular death or total (first and recurrent) heart failure
hospitalizations.[131] In prespecified subgroup analyses, sacubitril/valsartan was shown to be
beneficial in reducing hospitalization patients at the lower end of the LVEF spectrum (defined as a
median EF of ≤57%) and in women.[131] [132] 
• The PARALLAX trial compared sacubitril/valsartan with standard medical therapy (enalapril,
valsartan, or placebo) in patients with HFpEF (EF 40% or more) and found sacubitril/valsartan
significantly decreased plasma NT-pro-BNP concentration at 12 weeks, but did not improve
submaximal exercise capacity.[133]
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
Angiotensin-II receptor antagonists
• US guidelines recommend that angiotensin-II receptor antagonists may be considered for selected
patients with HFpEF, particularly among those with lower LVEF.[2] [3]
• One Cochrane review found there was no evidence supporting an important beneficial effect
of angiotensin-II receptor antagonists on mortality and hospitalization outcomes in patients
with HFpEF and that their use in HFpEF in the absence of an alternative indication is not
supported.[127]
• In the CHARM-preserved trial, candesartan was compared with placebo in patients with HFpEF
(EF 40% or more) but there was no significant difference in the primary end point of cardiovascular
death or heart failure hospitalization between the two groups.[134] Post-hoc analysis showed the
potential efficacy of candesartan was greatest at the lower end of the LVEF spectrum.[130]
Considerations for management of specific comorbidities
Hypertension
• Treatment of HFpEF is similar in patients with and without hypertension.[4] Thiazide diuretics may
be preferred over loop diuretics in those with HF, hypertension and mild fluid retention as they
confer more persistent antihypertensive effects.[3]
• The recommended target systolic BP in those with HFpEF is <130 mmHg.[2] When considering
antihypertensive therapy in patients with HFpEF, beta-blockers are generally avoided as negative
chronotropic effects may reduce tolerability.[2]
• See Essential hypertension .
Atrial fibrillation (AF)
• AF and HF may cause or exacerbate each other and the relationship is complex. HF therapies
should be optimized. Treatment of AF involves correction of the abnormal rate/rhythm, along with
anticoagulation. Options for rate and rhythm control are determined by the presence of HF and
extent of LV dysfunction.[3] [4]
• See Established atrial fibrillation .
Obesity
• Pharmacotherapy with semaglutide, a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist, has
been shown to improve patient-oriented quality of life outcomes (measured by Kansas City
Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire-Clinical Summary Score [KCCQ-CSS] and 6-minute walk distance
at 52 weeks) in patients with obesity and HFpEF and results in greater weight loss compared with
placebo.[88] In semaglutide-treated patients, the improvements in quality of life outcomes were
greater with larger body weight reduction.[89]
• Surgically induced weight loss in individuals with class III obesity (body mass index [BMI] 40
or above) has been shown to reverse left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and restore diastolic
function.[52] [135]
• See Obesity in adults .
Diabetes
• Treatment of HFpEF is similar in patients with and without diabetes. SGLT2 inhibitors are
recommended as first-line treatment of hyperglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes and HF to
reduce HF-related morbidity and mortality.[3] [4] See also information above on SGLT2 inhibitors.
• Finerenone, a nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, is recommended for the
prevention of HF hospitalization in patients with CKD and type 2 diabetes.[2] [5]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
• See Overview of diabetes .
Chronic coronary disease
• Patients with HFpEF and suggestive symptoms should be assessed for presence of coronary
artery disease (CAD).[2]
• Revascularization in those with HFpEF and CAD has been associated with less deterioration of
LV function and improved outcomes; however, prospective trials are needed to determine optimal
treatment of these patients.[2]
• See Chronic coronary disease .
Sleep disorders
• Patients with HF and daytime sleepiness may have sleep studies to assess for obstructive sleep
apnea and central sleep apnea.[3] [4]
• In patients with HF and obstructive sleep apnea, continuous positive airway pressure is
recommended to improve sleep quality and reduce daytime sleepiness, however it does not seem
to reduce mortality.[3] [4]
• See Obstructive sleep apnea , and Central sleep apnea .
Chronic kidney disease
• The effectiveness of guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) for HF in patients with concomitant
CKD is uncertain.[136] Some drugs should be used with caution in patients with renal impairment
and a dose adjustment may be required. Some drugs may also be contraindicated in patients with
renal impairment. Check your local drug information source for more information.
• Most patients will tolerate mild-to-moderate degrees of functional renal impairment without difficulty.
Initiation of GDMT for HF with a SGLT2 inhibitor, ARNi, or angiotensin-II receptor antagonist may
result in an initial rise in serum creatinine and a drop in eGFR, but this change is generally transient
and should not be a reason for discontinuation.[2] [4]
• An increase in serum creatinine of <50% above baseline, up to 3 mg/dL, or a decrease in
eGFR of <10% from baseline, as long as eGFR is >25 mL/min/1.73 m², may be considered
as acceptable.
• If the serum creatinine increases to >3 mg/dL, the renal insufficiency can severely limit the
efficacy and enhance the toxicity of established treatments.[137] [138]
• Aldosterone antagonists should be used with caution in patients with CKD and hyperkalemia. The
US guidelines advise that they are only initiated in patients with eGFR >30mL/min/1.73m² and
serum potassium <5.0 mEq/L.[3]
• Consult with a nephrology specialist should be considered.
• See Chronic kidney disease .
Hyperlipidemia
• All patients with HFpEF and hyperlipidemia will need lifestyle modifications and most will also
require treatment with a statin possibly with additional nonstatin lipid-lowering therapy.
• For details of management of HF with hypercholesterolemia, see Hypercholesterolemia
(Management approach) .
Thyroid disorders
• Both hypo- and hyperthyroidism are associated with HF and assessment of thyroid function is
recommended.
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
• Thyroid disorders are treated as per endocrinology guidelines; referral to endocrinologist should be
considered.
• See Overview of thyroid dysfunction .
Depression
• Depression is common in patients with HF and is associated with a reduced quality of life and
increased mortality. Treatment with conventional therapies (e.g., antidepressants) does not seem to
directly improve these outcomes. However, interventions that focus on improving HF self-care (e.g.,
psychotherapy, selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors [SSRIs], or nurse-led support) may reduce
hospitalization and mortality in patients with moderate or severe depression.[3] [4]
• See Depression in adults .
Cancer
• Patients who develop HF secondary to cancer therapy should be treated with GDMT. Generally,
GDMT should not be discontinued unless there are specific and compelling reasons to hold
these medications and this should be managed by a multidisciplinary team. Before starting any
cardiotoxic cancer therapy baseline cardiac function should be measured and ongoing monitoring
after completion of a course of chemotherapy may be helpful for risk stratification.[3] [4]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute ( summary )
all patients
1st sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2)
inhibitor
plus lifestyle measures
adjunct diuretic
adjunct aldosterone antagonist
adjunct angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor
(ARNi)
adjunct angiotensin-II receptor antagonist
with atrial fibrillation (AF) adjunct rate and rhythm control + anticoagulation
with obesity adjunct weight loss program
with diabetes plus treatment of hyperglycemia
adjunct finerenone
with chronic coronary
disease
adjunct surgical revascularization
with daytime sleepiness adjunct assessment and treatment of sleep apnea
with chronic kidney
disease
adjunct supportive measures +/- nephrology
referral
with hyperlipidemia adjunct lipid-lowering therapy
with thyroid disorder adjunct referral to endocrinologist
with depression plus interventions to improve HF self-care
comorbid cancer plus multidisciplinary team management
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute
all patients
1st sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2)
inhibitor
Primary options
» dapagliflozin: 10 mg orally once daily in the
morning
OR
» empagliflozin: 10 mg orally once daily in the
morning
» SGLT2 inhibitors (e.g., dapagliflozin,
empagliflozin) are recommended for patients
with HFpEF to decrease heart failure
hospitalizations and cardiovascular mortality.[2]
[3] [5][91] [92]
» The EMPEROR-Preserved trial found that
empagliflozin reduced the combined risk of
cardiovascular death or hospitalization for heart
failure (HF) in patients with HFpEF, regardless of
the presence or absence of diabetes, compared
with placebo.[93] [94] [95] Patients who received
empagliflozin also had an early and sustained
reduction in risk and severity of a broad range
of inpatient and outpatient events, such as
a decrease in the need for hospitalizations
requiring aggressive therapy, a decrease of
worsening events requiring intensification
of diuretics, and an increased likelihood of
functional class improvement.[98] Health-
related quality of life was also improved.[99]
 The effects were similar in women and men,
and seen across a broad age spectrum.[100]
[101] The PRESERVED-HF trial compared
dapagliflozin with placebo in patients with
HFpEF and found that 12 weeks of dapagliflozin
treatment significantly improved patient-reported
symptoms, physical limitations, and exercise
function, and was well tolerated in chronic
HFpEF.[103] The DELIVER trial found that
dapagliflozin reduced the combined risk of
worsening heart failure or cardiovascular death
among patients with heart failure and a mildly
reduced or preserved ejection fraction, both in
those with and without history of recent heart
failure hospitalization, and across the spectrum
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
of baseline kidney function and glycemic
range.[105] [106] [107] [108] [109] [110] [111]
 Prespecified analysis on outcomes according
to frailty status found that improvements in
symptoms, physical function, and quality of
life were larger in patients with the greatest
level of frailty.[118] The efficacy and safety of
dapagliflozin was also found to be consistent
across the spectrum of body mass index, with
a larger absolute effect seen in patients with
obesity.[119]
plus lifestyle measures
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Lifestyle changes, dietary and nutritional
modifications, exercise training, and health
maintenance have the potential to reduce heart
failure progression.[82]
» Weight loss should be promoted in patients
who are overweight.
» Exercise training or regular physical activity is
recommended to improve function and quality
of life.[3] [83][84] [85] [86] Cardiac rehabilitation,
which includes medical evaluation, education
on adherence to medication, advice on diet,
psychosocial support, and an exercise training
and physical activity program can also be
recommended to improve function, exercise
tolerance, and quality of life. US guidelines
advise that patients who are on optimal
guideline-directed medical treatment for HF, in
stable medical condition, and able to participate
in an exercise program are candidates for an
exercise rehabilitation program.[3] There is
developing evidence to support home-based
cardiac rehabilitation alternatives to center-based
programs.[87] [88] [89]
» Dietary sodium intake is an easily modifiable
factor. There is limited evidence for sodium
restriction in patients with heart failure; however,
guidelines recommend that excessive sodium
intake should be avoided.[3] [4][90]
» Tobacco and alcohol discontinuation should be
encouraged.
adjunct diuretic
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
Acute
» furosemide: 20-40 mg intravenously/
intramuscularly initially, increase by 20 mg/
dose increments every 2 hours according to
response; 20-80 mg orally initially, increase
by 20-40 mg/dose increments every 6-8
hours according to response, maximum 600
mg/day
OR
» bumetanide: 0.5 to 1 mg intravenously/
intramuscularly every 2-3 hours according to
response, maximum 10 mg/day; 0.5 to 2 mg
orally once daily initially, may repeat every
4-5 hours until response, maximum 10 mg/
day
OR
» torsemide: 10-20 mg orally once daily
initially, increase dose gradually according to
response, maximum 200 mg/day
OR
» chlorothiazide: 500-1000 mg orally once or
twice daily
OR
» hydrochlorothiazide: 25-200 mg orally once
daily
OR
» indapamide: 2.5 to 5 mg orally once daily
OR
» metolazone: 5-20 mg orally once daily
» All patients with signs of congestion should
receive diuretics to relieve symptoms and
prevent worsening heart failure.[2] [3] [4][5]
» Loop diuretics are the preferred diuretic
for use in most patients with heart failure. In
patients with comorbid hypertension, and only
mild fluid retention, a thiazide diuretic may be
preferred because they confer more persistent
antihypertensive effects.[3]
» Loop diuretics used for the treatment of heart
failure and congestion include furosemide,
bumetanide, and torsemide. The most commonly
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
used agent appears to be furosemide, but
some patients may respond more favorably to
another loop diuretic. In treatment resistance,
loop diuretics should be combined with
a thiazide diuretic (e.g., chlorothiazide,
hydrochlorothiazide) or a thiazide-like diuretic
(e.g., metolazone, indapamide).
» Careful monitoring of renal function and
electrolytes is essential. The minimum dose of
diuretic should be used to relieve congestion,
keep the patient asymptomatic, and maintain a
dry weight. Some patients may be able to come
off the diuretics completely, but they need very
close long-term follow-up.
adjunct aldosterone antagonist
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» spironolactone: 12.5 to 50 mg orally once
daily
OR
» eplerenone: 25-50 mg orally once daily
» US guidelines recommend that aldosterone
antagonists (e.g., spironolactone, eplerenone)
should be considered in patients with HFpEF
with and without congestion, particularly among
those with lower left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF).[2] [3]
» For patients with HFpEF and congestion, an
aldosterone antagonist (e.g., spironolactone,
eplerenone) can be started upfront with or
without a loop diuretic.[11]
» One Cochrane review found that aldosterone
antagonists in HFpEF have a modest beneficial
effect in reducing heart failure hospitalization,
but probably have little or no effect on
cardiovascular mortality and quality of life.[127]
» The TOPCAT trial compared spironolactone
with placebo in patients with HFpEF (EF 45%
or more) and found no significant difference in
the primary end point, a composite of death from
cardiovascular causes, aborted cardiac arrest,
or hospitalization for heart failure.[128] The
trial included participants in the US, Canada,
Brazil, Argentina, Russia, and Georgia. Post-
hoc analysis suggested that there were clinical
benefits with spironolactone in patients with
HFpEF from the Americas, with a significant
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
Acute
reduction in the primary end point. In Russia and
Georgia, all clinical event rates were markedly
lower, and there was no detectable impact of
spironolactone on any outcomes.[129] Further
post-hoc analysis by ejection fraction showed the
potential efficacy of spironolactone was greatest
at the lower end of the LVEF spectrum.[130]
» Spironolactone and eplerenone can both
cause hyperkalemia, and precautions should be
taken to minimize the risk; regular monitoring
of serum potassium and renal function
is recommended.[3] Use of aldosterone
antagonists and angiotensin-II receptor
antagonists together may increase the risk of
hyperkalemia, especially in older patients or
patients with renal impairment.
adjunct angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor
(ARNi)
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» sacubitril/valsartan: treatment-naive or
treatment-experienced on a low dose: 24
mg (sacubitril)/26 mg (valsartan) orally
twice daily initially, increase gradually
according to response, maximum 97 mg
(sacubitril)/103 mg (valsartan) twice daily;
treatment-experienced on a usual dose: 49
mg (sacubitril)/51 mg (valsartan) orally twice
daily initially, increase gradually according to
response, maximum 97 mg (sacubitril)/103
mg (valsartan) twice daily
Patients not taking an ACE inhibitor or
angiotensin-II receptor antagonist (treatment-
naive) or those on a low dose of an ACE
inhibitor or angiotensin-II receptor antagonist
should be started on a lower dose of
sacubitril/valsartan. Patients who were being
treated with an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin-
II receptor antagonist (treatment-experienced)
should be started on a higher dose of
sacubitril/valsartan. Allow 36 hours between
stopping an ACE inhibitor and starting this
drug.
» US guidelines recommend that sacubitril/
valsartan may be considered for selected
patients with HFpEF, particularly among those
with lower LVEF.[2] [3]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
» One Cochrane review found that ARNi
treatment in HFpEF has a modest beneficial
effect in reducing heart failure hospitalization,
but probably has little or no effect on
cardiovascular mortality and quality of life.[127]
» The PARAGON-HF trial compared sacubitril/
valsartan with valsartan alone in patients with
HFpEF (EF 45% or more) and found that
sacubitril/valsartan did not achieve a significant
reduction in the primary composite end point of
cardiovascular death or total (first and recurrent)
heart failure hospitalizations.[131] In prespecified
subgroup analyses, sacubitril/valsartan was
shown to be beneficial in reducing hospitalization
patients at the lower end of the LVEF spectrum
and in women.[131] [132]
» The PARALLAX trial compared sacubitril/
valsartan with standard medical therapy
(enalapril, valsartan, or placebo) in patients with
HFpEF (EF 40% or more) and found sacubitril/
valsartan significantly decreased plasma NT-
pro-BNP concentration at 12 weeks, but did not
improve submaximal exercise capacity.[133]
adjunct angiotensin-II receptor antagonist
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» candesartan cilexetil: 4-32 mg orally once
daily
OR
» losartan: 25-150 mg orally once daily
OR
» valsartan: 40-160 mg orally twice daily
» US guidelines recommend that angiotensin-
II receptor antagonists may be considered for
selected patients with HFpEF, particularly among
those with lower LVEF.[2] [3] 
» One Cochrane review found there was no
evidence supporting an important beneficial
effect of angiotensin-II receptor antagonists
on mortality and hospitalization outcomes in
patients with HFpEF and that their use in HFpEF
in the absence of an alternative indication is not
supported.[127]
» In the CHARM-preserved trial, candesartan
was compared with placebo in patients with
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
Acute
HFpEF (EF 40% or more) but there was
no significant difference in the primary end
point of cardiovascular death or heart failure
hospitalization) between the two groups.[134]
Post-hoc analysis showed the potential efficacy
of candesartan was greatest at the lower end of
the LVEF spectrum.[130] 
»
with atrial fibrillation (AF) adjunct rate and rhythm control + anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» AF and HF may cause or exacerbate each
other and the relationship is complex.
» HF therapies should be optimized. Treatment
of AF involves correction of the abnormal rate/
rhythm, along with anticoagulation. Options for
rate and rhythm control are determined by the
presence of HF and extent of LV dysfunction.[3]
[4]
» See Established atrial fibrillation .
with obesity adjunct weight loss program
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Pharmacotherapy with semaglutide, a
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor
agonist, has been shown to improve patient-
oriented quality of life outcomes (measured by
Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire-
Clinical Summary Score [KCCQ-CSS] and 6-
minute walk distance at 52 weeks) in patients
with obesity and HFpEF and results in greater
weight loss compared with placebo.[139] In
semaglutide-treated patients, the improvements
in quality of life outcomes were greater with
larger body weight reduction.[140]
» Surgically induced weight loss in individuals
with class III obesity (body mass index [BMI]
40 or above) has been shown to reverse left
ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and restore diastolic
function.[52] [135]
» See Obesity in adults .
with diabetes plus treatment of hyperglycemia
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Treatment of HFpEF is similar in patients with
and without diabetes.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
» SGLT2 inhibitors are recommended as first-
line treatment of hyperglycemia in patients with
type 2 diabetes and HF to reduce HF-related
morbidity and mortality.[3] [4]
» See Overview of diabetes .
adjunct finerenone
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» finerenone: 20 mg orally once daily
A dose adjustment may be required in
patients with renal impairment. Adjust dose
according to serum potassium levels and
eGFR.
» Finerenone, a nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonist, is recommended for the
prevention of HF hospitalization in patients with
chronic kidney disease and type 2 diabetes.[5]
with chronic coronary
disease
adjunct surgical revascularization
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Revascularization in those with HFpEF and
coronary artery disease has been associated
with less deterioration of LV function and
improved outcomes; however, prospective trials
are needed to determine optimal treatment of
these patients.[2]
» See Chronic coronary disease .
with daytime sleepiness adjunct assessment and treatment of sleep apnea
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Patients with HF and daytime sleepiness may
have sleep studies to assess for obstructive
sleep apnea and central sleep apnea.[3] [4]
» In patients with HF and obstructive sleep
apnea, continuous positive airway pressure
is recommended to improve sleep quality and
reduce daytime sleepiness, however it does not
seem to reduce mortality.[3] [4]
» See Obstructive sleep apnea , and Central
sleep apnea .
with chronic kidney
disease
adjunct supportive measures +/- nephrology
referral
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
Acute
» Some drugs used in the management of
HF should be used with caution in patients
with renal impairment and a dose adjustment
may be required. Some drugs may also be
contraindicated in patients with renal impairment.
Check your local drug information source for
more information.
» Most patients will tolerate mild-to-moderate
degrees of functional renal impairment without
difficulty. Initiation of guideline directed-medical
therapy (GDMT) for HF with a SGLT2 inhibitor,
ARNi, or angiotensin-II receptor antagonist
may result in an initial rise in serum creatinine
and a drop in estimated glomerular filtration
rate (eGFR), but this change is generally
transient and should not be a reason for
discontinuation.[2] [4]
» An increase in serum creatinine of <50%
above baseline, up to 3 mg/dL, or a decrease in
eGFR of <10% from baseline, as long as eGFR
is >25 mL/min/1.73 m², may be considered as
acceptable.
» If the serum creatinine increases to >3 mg/
dL, the renal insufficiency can severely limit the
efficacy and enhance the toxicity of established
treatments.[137] [138]
» Aldosterone antagonists should be used with
caution in patients with CKD and hyperkalemia.
The US guidelines advise that they are
only initiated in patients with eGFR >30mL/
min/1.73m² and serum potassium <5.0 mEq/L.[3]
» Consult with a nephrology specialist should be
considered.
» See Chronic kidney disease .
with hyperlipidemia adjunct lipid-lowering therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» All patients with HFpEF and hyperlipidemia
will need lifestyle modifications and most will
also require treatment with a statin possibly with
additional nonstatin lipid-lowering therapy.
» For details of management of HF with
hypercholesterolemia, see Hypercholesterolemia
(Treatment algorithm) .
with thyroid disorder adjunct referral to endocrinologist
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
» Both hypo- and hyperthyroidism are associated
with HF and assessment of thyroid function is
recommended.
» Thyroid disorders are treated as per
endocrinology guidelines; referral to
endocrinologist should be considered.
» See Overview of thyroid disorders .
with depression plus interventions to improve HF self-care
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Depression is common in patients with HF and
is associated with a reduced quality of life and
increased mortality.
» Treatment with conventional therapies (e.g.,
antidepressants) does not seem to directly
improve these outcomes. However, interventions
that focus on improving HF self-care (e.g.,
psychotherapy, selective serotonin-reuptake
inhibitors [SSRIs], or nurse-led support) may
reduce hospitalization and mortality in patients
with moderate or severe depression.[3] [4]
» See Depression in adults .
comorbid cancer plus multidisciplinary team management
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Patients who develop HF and/or depressed
LV systolic function secondary to cancer therapy
should be treated with GDMT. Generally, GDMT
should not be discontinued unless there are
specific and compelling reasons to hold these
medications and this should be managed by a
multidisciplinary team.
» Before starting any cardiotoxic cancer therapy
baseline cardiac function should be measured
and ongoing monitoring after completion of a
course of chemotherapy may be helpful for risk
stratification.[3] [4]
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
Emerging
Sotagliflozin
Sotagliflozin is an inhibitor of both sodium-glucose cotransporter (SGLT)-1 and SGLT-2. The US Food and
Drug Administration has approved sotagliflozin to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death, hospitalization for
heart failure, and urgent heart failure visit in adults with heart failure across the full range of left ventricular
ejection fraction (including preserved ejection fraction and reduced ejection fraction), or adults with type 2
diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and other cardiovascular risk factors.
Praliciguat
Praliciguat is an oral soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator. In 2018 it received fast track designation from
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of HFpEF. Since then, the CAPACITY HFpEF
randomized controlled trial found that, compared with placebo, praliciguat did not significantly improve peak
rate of oxygen consumption from baseline to week 12.[141]
Remote monitoring
Implantable hemodynamic monitoring has been associated with a reduction in hospitalizations for HF. In the
CHAMPION trial, the rate of HF-related hospitalizations at 6 months in patients with HFpEF whose care was
guided by a pulmonary artery pressure monitoring device (CardioMEMS) was 46% lower than the control
group.[142] However, there were methodologic concerns about this trial, including being nonblinded. In the
GUIDE-HF trial, which was blinded, a composite primary endpoint of mortality and total heart failure events
was not reduced by use of hemodynamic-guided care with CardioMEMS.[143] The American College of
Cardiology suggests that implantable hemodynamic monitoring may be most useful in patients with HFpEF
who: experience one or more hospitalizations for HF and continue to experience NYHA functional class III
symptoms despite optimal guideline-directed medical therapy; experience significant lability in volume status
despite close ambulatory monitoring; have cardiorenal syndrome; or have comorbidities, such as obesity or
chronic lung disease, for which differentiation of HF from other causes of dyspnea is difficult.[2]
Primary prevention
Primary prevention is important for those at risk for heart failure (HF; stage A) and for those with pre-HF
(stage B).[3]
HF is the final pathway for a wide array of pathophysiologic processes. Interventions that reduce the risk
of development of any cardiovascular disease will ultimately reduce the incidence of HF.[52] [53] Thus, key
public health targets are prevention of development of underlying causes and comorbidities: hypertension,
diabetes, dyslipidemia, obesity (i.e., metabolic syndrome), and ischemic heart disease.
• Lifestyle modifications, such as increasing physical activity, reducing tobacco, reducing alcohol and
recreational drug use, reducing daily salt intake, and proper medical treatment of established diseases
such as hypertension, diabetes, and coronary artery disease, are expected to help reduce incident
heart failure.[3] [52] [53] [54] [55]
• The US Preventive Services Task Force recommends that adults at increased risk of cardiovascular
disease are offered behavioral counseling interventions to promote a healthy diet and physical activity;
those not at high risk may also be considered for behavioral counseling interventions.[56] [57]
The table that follows summarizes recommendations for primary prevention of heart failure taken from
the AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure: A Report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines.[3]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
Note that an individual patient may fall into more than one group and so interventions might be additive;
please review all population and subpopulation groups to assess all that apply.
Stage A: at risk for heart failure
Without current or previous symptoms/signs of heart failure, and without structural heart
disease, or cardiac biomarkers of stretch or injury; this includes people with: hypertension,
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (CVD), diabetes, metabolic syndrome and obesity,
exposure to cardiotoxic agents, genetic variant for cardiomyopathy or family history of
cardiomyopathy; note that in in the general population, validated multivariable risk scores can
be useful to estimate subsequent risk of incident heart failure
With hypertension
Intervention Goal
Blood pressure control
Optimize blood pressure control using lifestyle
interventions +/- antihypertensive medication to
reduce blood pressure in line with published clinical
guidance on management of hypertension.
See Essential hypertension .
Prevention of symptomatic heart failure
With cardiovascular disease (CVD)
Intervention Goal
Optimal management of CVD
Ensure that the patient is receiving recommended
interventions to optimize CVD control in line with
published clinical guidance on management of CVD.
See Chronic coronary disease .
Reduced future risk of heart failure
With type 2 diabetes, with established CVD or high CVD risk
Intervention Goal
Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 (SGLT2)
inhibitor
In addition to interventions to optimize guideline-
based care for type 2 diabetes, an SGLT2 inhibitor is
recommended in this group.
Prevention of hospitalization for heart failure
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
With exposure to cardiotoxic agents
Intervention Goal
Referral for multidisciplinary evaluation
Refer for multidisciplinary evaluation and
management; the specialist team may initiate
monitoring strategies including serial monitoring of
left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) to identify
subclinical cardiac injury.
The team may also recommend use of
cardioprotective agents and/or temporary or
permanent interruption of the cardiotoxic drug.
Reduced risk of progression to heart failure
First degree relative with genetic or inherited cardiomyopathy; and positive genetic screening
result
Intervention Goal
Genetic counseling, plus referral for
guideline-directed management of specific
cardiomyopathy subtype
Prompt consideration of treatment is recommended.
Genetic testing contributes to risk stratification and
may guide treatment selection including use of:
• defibrillators for primary prevention of sudden
death; and
• exercise limitation for hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and the desmosomal
variants.
Consultation with a trained counselor before and
after genetic testing is recommended to help the
patient understand and weigh the implications
of possible results for their own lives and those
of family members, including the potential for
discrimination on the basis of genetic information.
Decreased heart failure progression and
sudden death
Stage B: pre-heart failure
Without current or previous symptoms/signs of heart failure but with evidence of at least one
of the following: structural heart disease (reduced left or right ventricular systolic function;
reduced ejection fraction; reduced strain; ventricular hypertrophy; chamber enlargement;
wall motion abnormalities; valvular heart disease); evidence of increased filling pressures
(by invasive hemodynamic measurements, or noninvasive imaging suggesting elevated
filling pressures [e.g., doppler echocardiography]); with risk factors and increased levels of
natriuretic peptide (BNP ≥35 pg/mL, NT-proBNP ≥125 pg/mL) or persistently elevated cardiac
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
troponin, in the absence of competing diagnoses resulting in biomarker elevations such as
acute coronary syndrome, CKD, pulmonary embolus, or myopericarditis.
With hypertension
Intervention Goal
Blood pressure control
Optimize blood pressure control using lifestyle
interventions +/- antihypertensive medication to
reduce blood pressure in line with published clinical
guidance on management of hypertension.
See Essential hypertension .
Prevention of symptomatic heart failure
With CVD
Intervention Goal
Optimal management of CVD
Ensure that the patient is receiving recommended
interventions to optimize CVD control in line with
published clinical guidance on management of CVD.
See Chronic coronary disease.
Reduced future risk of heart failure
With type 2 diabetes, with established CVD, or high CVD risk
Intervention Goal
SGLT2 inhibitor
In addition to interventions to optimize guideline-
based care for type 2 diabetes, an SGLT2 inhibitor is
recommended in this group.
Prevention of hospitalization for heart failure
With elevated BNP or NT-proBNP (BNP ≥35 pg/mL, NT-proBNP ≥125 pg/mL)
Intervention Goal
Referral for cardiovascular team-based care
Refer people with elevated natriuretic peptide
biomarkers to a cardiovascular specialist for
diagnostic evaluation and treatment.
Prevention of development of left ventricular
dysfunction (systolic or diastolic) or new-
onset heart failure
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
With exposure to cardiotoxic agents
Intervention Goal
Referral for multidisciplinary evaluation
Refer for multidisciplinary evaluation and
management; the specialist team may initiate
monitoring strategies including serial monitoring of
left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) to identify
subclinical cardiac injury.
The team may also recommend use of
cardioprotective agents, and/or temporary or
permanent interruption of the cardiotoxic drug.
Reduced risk of progression to heart failure
First degree relative of a person with genetic or inherited cardiomyopathy, or with personal
history of nonischemic cardiomyopathy; and with positive genetic screening result
Intervention Goal
Genetic counseling, plus referral for
guideline-directed management of specific
cardiomyopathy subtype
Prompt consideration of treatment is recommended.
Genetic testing contributes to risk stratification and
may guide treatment selection including use of:
• defibrillators for primary prevention of sudden
death; and
• exercise limitation for hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and the desmosomal
variants.
Consultation with a trained counselor before and
after genetic testing is recommended to help the
patient understand and weigh the implications
of possible results for their own lives and those
of family members, including the potential for
discrimination on the basis of genetic information.
Decreased heart failure progression and
sudden death
With a history of myocardial infarction (MI) or acute coronary syndrome (ACS)
Intervention Goal
Statin
Offer a statin to all those in this group (with pre-
heart failure) who have a recent or remote history of
MI or ACS.
Prevention of symptomatic heart failure and
adverse cardiovascular events
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Management
MANAGEMENT
Secondary prevention
Risk factor modification and management of comorbidities that might contribute to symptoms are the key to
preventing or delaying the onset of overt clinical heart failure. Physicians are advised to:
• Monitor blood pressure (BP) as closely as necessary to meet targets based on guidelines. The
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines recommend a target of <130
mmHg for patients with HFpEF, avoiding the use of nitrates.[158]
• Monitor volume status (daily weights and adjustment of diuretic dose as necessary).
• Pursue revascularization in patients with coronary artery disease, when appropriate; aggressive
medical management of ischemia is advised.
• Maintain adequate rate control in patients with tachyarrhythmias (e.g., atrial fibrillation); if there is
difficulty in achieving rate control or there is substantial symptom burden from the arrhythmia, rhythm
control, and maintenance of sinus rhythm should be considered. Anticoagulation should be considered
in all patients with atrial fibrillation (based on validated clinical risk score, such as CHA2DS2-VASc)
unless contraindicated. Very aggressive rate control (especially with beta blockers) should be avoided,
as patients may have significant LA dysfunction with low stroke volume and inability to increase stroke
volume during exercise.
• In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, the target HbA1c is <7.0% to 7.5% for those with a lower
comorbidity burden or less severe HF, with higher targets for older patients with higher comorbidity
burden or advanced HF. Start SGLT2 inhibitor as first line therapy. Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor
agonist is an option if the patient has obesity or is at high risk for ASCVD. Avoid alogliptin, saxagliptin,
and thiazolidinediones.[2]
• In patients with chronic kidney disease, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers and SGLT2
inhibitors may slow progression of renal disease.[2]
• Treat obstructive sleep apnea if present.
• Promote weight loss in overweight patients. Surgically induced weight loss may be considered in
patients with class III obesity (BMI 40 or above).
• Encourage tobacco and alcohol discontinuation.
• Encourage regular aerobic exercise and consider cardiac rehabilitation when appropriate. Exercise
training has been shown to improve exercise capacity, as well as quality of life, in patients with
HPpEF.[163]
Patient discussions
Patients should be advised to:
• Monitor blood pressure closely
• Perform daily weights to monitor volume status
• Manage weight through diet and regular, symptom-limited exercise
• Avoid excessive intake of sodium
• Discontinue tobacco and alcohol
• Have at least annual follow-up visits with the primary care physician for screening tests.
• Have vaccinations against respiratory infections, such as influenza, COVID-19, pneumococcal
disease, and respiratory syncytial virus (patients ages 60 years and older).[162]
• Manage comorbidities:
• Control of hypertension and diabetes (e.g., provide patients with blood pressure and HbA1c
goal)
• Management of lipids (e.g., provide leaflets and show website links for diet, exercise, and
healthy lifestyle).
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Follow up
Monitoring
Monitoring
Clinicians are advised to:
• Monitor blood pressure as closely as necessary to meet targets based on the latest guidelines and
to avoid symptomatic postural hypotension[157] [158] [159] [160]
• Monitor volume status (daily weights and adjustment of diuretic dose as necessary)
• Screen for common comorbidities:
• Screen for diabetes annually; if the patient is diabetic, strict glucose control with hemoglobin
A1c every 3 to 6 months should be performed
• Screen for coronary artery disease when appropriate
• Screen for sleep apnea when appropriate
• Screen for chronic kidney disease.
Patients benefit from frequent formal evaluation in a specialized center or monitoring in a management
program.[3] Assessment should be made at each visit of the ability of a patient to perform routine and
desired activities of daily living. Assessment should be also made of the fluid status and weight of
the patient. Careful history of current use of alcohol, tobacco, illicit drugs, alternative therapies, and
chemotherapy drugs, as well as diet and sodium intake, should be obtained at each visit.[161] Repeat
measurement of ejection fraction and assessment of the severity of structural remodeling can provide
useful information in patients with heart failure who have had a change in clinical status, or who have
experienced or recovered from a clinical event.
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
pulmonary hypertension long term medium
HFpEF is one of the leading causes of pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary hypertension in the setting
of HFpEF (PH-HFpEF) is reported to be increasing in prevalence.[154] [155] Patients with HFpEF who
develop pulmonary hypertension have more severe symptoms and more adverse outcomes (exercise
intolerance, frequent hospitalizations, right heart failure, and reduced survival) than those without
pulmonary hypertension.[154] Management of PH-HFpEF is challenging because of the lack of effective
therapies.
sudden cardiac death long term low
In a series of 1941 patients at a single center from 1995 to 2004, the incidence of sudden death was
2.1%. Five variables were found to be independently associated with a significant increased risk of
sudden cardiac death: diabetes mellitus, presence of mitral regurgitation, severity of chronic heart failure,
occurrence of an myocardial infarction within 3 days prior to index cardiac catheterization, and severity of
coronary artery disease.[153]
acute pulmonary edema variable medium
Acute pulmonary edema is the presenting symptom in approximately 20% of patients with HFpEF.[14]
hyperkalemia variable medium
Patients with heart failure have several factors that may put them at a high risk of hyperkalemia; these
include factors that are directly related to the condition (i.e., impaired delivery of sodium and water to the
distal renal tubule), associated comorbidities (e.g., diabetes, chronic kidney disease), and use of drugs
that cause hyperkalemia.[3] [156]
Prognosis
Risk factor modification is the key in preventing or delaying the onset of overt clinical heart failure. Once
heart failure has been diagnosed, the prognosis of patients with HFpEF appears to be similar to that of
patients with impaired systolic function. The reported rates of mortality (1 year and 5 years), readmission for
heart failure, and in-hospital complications are similar between the 2 groups.[12] [14]
Higher levels of NT-pro-BNP are associated with increased risk of all cause mortality and heart failure
hospitalizations.[146]
Presence of anemia might be an indicator for poor prognosis and/or increased mortality and should be
treated appropriately.[147]
Depression is found in 20% to 40% of heart failure patients and is associated with increased morbidity and
mortality, when compared with heart failure patients without depression.[148] [149] [150] Therefore, there is a
need for screening and early intervention when depression is present.[151]
One study looking at comorbidities in two large cohorts of patients (one from 2002 and one from 2017) found
that in the earlier cohort, cerebrovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and chronic kidney disease (CKD) were
independent predictors for adverse outcome (HF hospitalization and all-cause mortality during a total follow-
up of 1.5 years), and atrial fibrillation/flutter showed a nonsignificant trend towards poor outcome. In the
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Follow up
later 2017 cohort, the independent predictors were anemia, obesity and COPD, with CKD showing a trend
towards poor outcome. Other chronic conditions included in the model were not independently associated
with prognosis, however an overall higher comorbidity burden was associated with an increased risk of HF
hospitalization or all-cause mortality.[18]
A meta-analysis suggests that even a pseudonormal diastolic filling pattern is associated with an increased
risk of death compared with abnormal relaxation or a normal pattern, and the risk is similar to that noted with
a restrictive filling pattern.[152]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Guidelines
GUIDELINES
Diagnostic guidelines
International
2024 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on clinical assessment,
management, and trajectory of patients hospitalized with heart failure
focused update: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set
Oversight Committee (https://www.acc.org/Guidelines#/tab1)   [77]
Published by: Journal of the American College of Cardiology Last published: 2024
ACR appropriateness criteria: suspected and known heart failure
(https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/Clinical-Tools-and-Reference/
Appropriateness-Criteria)   [78]
Published by: American College of Radiology Last published: 2024
2023 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on management of heart failure
with preserved ejection fraction (https://www.acc.org/guidelines)   [2]
Published by: American College of Cardiology Last published: 2023
2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management of heart failure (https://
professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements)   [3]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; Heart Failure Society of America
Last published: 2022
Multimodality imaging in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection
fraction (https://www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Scientific-Documents/
Recommendations-and-position-papers)   [79]
Published by: European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging Last published: 2021
2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic
heart failure (https://www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-
Guidelines)   [4]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2021
Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/cg187)   [80]
Published by: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2021
Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and management (https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng106)   [81]
Published by: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2018
62 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 63 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Guidelines
Treatment guidelines
International
2024 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on clinical assessment,
management, and trajectory of patients hospitalized with heart failure
focused update: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set
Oversight Committee (https://www.acc.org/Guidelines#/tab1)   [77]
Published by: Journal of the American College of Cardiology Last published: 2024
2023 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on management of heart failure
with preserved ejection fraction (https://www.acc.org/guidelines)   [2]
Published by: American College of Cardiology Last published: 2023
2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management of heart failure (https://
professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements)   [3]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; Heart Failure Society of America
Last published: 2022
2021 update to the 2017 ACC expert consensus decision pathway for
optimization of heart failure treatment: answers to 10 pivotal issues about
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (https://www.acc.org/guidelines)  
[144]
Published by: American College of Cardiology Last published: 2021
CCS/CHFS Heart failure guidelines: clinical trial update on functional mitral
regurgitation, SGLT2 inhibitors, ARNI in HFpEF, and tafamidis in amyloidosis
 (https://heartfailure.ca/education/guidelines-clinical-updates)   [145]
Published by: Canadian Cardiovascular Society; Canadian Heart Failure
Society
Last published: 2020
2023 Focused update of the 2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and
treatment of acute and chronic heart failure (https://www.escardio.org/
Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [5]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2023
Diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [4]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2021
Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management (https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/cg187)   [80]
Published by: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2021
Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and management (https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng106)   [81]
Published by: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2018
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
63
=== Page 64 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Guidelines
GUIDELINES
64 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 65 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
Key articles
• Bozkurt B, Coats AJ, Tsutsui H, et al. Universal definition and classification of heart failure: a report of
the Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology,
Japanese Heart Failure Society and Writing Committee of the Universal Definition of Heart Failure.
2021 Mar 1;S1071-9164(21)00050-6.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.cardfail.2021.01.022)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33663906?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Kittleson MM, Panjrath GS, Amancherla K, et al. 2023 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on
management of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a report of the American College of
Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 May 9;81(18):1835-78.  Full
text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109723050982?via%3Dihub)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37137593?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management
of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Joint Committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2022 May 3;145(18):e895-1032. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001063)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35363499?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment
of acute and chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2021 Sep 21;42(36):3599-726.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/36/3599/6358045)
• McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2023 focused update of the 2021 ESC guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2023 Oct 1;44(37):3627-39. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/44/37/3627/7246292)
• Borlaug BA, Sharma K, Shah SJ, et al. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: JACC scientific
statement. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 May 9;81(18):1810-34. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37137592?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. Bozkurt B, Coats AJ, Tsutsui H, et al. Universal definition and classification of heart failure: a report of
the Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology,
Japanese Heart Failure Society and Writing Committee of the Universal Definition of Heart Failure.
2021 Mar 1;S1071-9164(21)00050-6.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.cardfail.2021.01.022)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33663906?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Kittleson MM, Panjrath GS, Amancherla K, et al. 2023 ACC expert consensus decision pathway on
management of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a report of the American College of
Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 May 9;81(18):1835-78.  Full
text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109723050982?via%3Dihub)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37137593?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
65
=== Page 66 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
REFERENCES
3. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management
of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Joint Committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2022 May 3;145(18):e895-1032. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001063)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35363499?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment
of acute and chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2021 Sep 21;42(36):3599-726.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/36/3599/6358045)
5. McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2023 focused update of the 2021 ESC guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2023 Oct 1;44(37):3627-39. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/44/37/3627/7246292)
6. Youn JC, Ahn Y, Jung HO. Pathophysiology of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.
Heart Fail Clin. 2021 Jul;17(3):327-35. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34051965?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Nagueh SF. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: insights into diagnosis and pathophysiology.
Cardiovasc Res. 2021 Mar 21;117(4):999-1014.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/
article/117/4/999/5876832?login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32717061?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Redfield MM, Borlaug BA. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a review. JAMA.
2023 Mar 14;329(10):827-38. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36917048?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Martin SS, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. 2024 heart disease and stroke statistics: a report of US
and global data from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2024 Feb 20;149(8):e347-913. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001209)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38264914?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Norhammar A, Bodegard J, Vanderheyden M, et al. Prevalence, outcomes and costs of a
contemporary, multinational population with heart failure. Heart. 2023 Mar 10;109(7):548-56.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10086499)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36781285?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Borlaug BA, Sharma K, Shah SJ, et al. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: JACC scientific
statement. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 May 9;81(18):1810-34. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37137592?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, et al. Trends in prevalence and outcome of heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 20;355(3):251-9.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/10.1056/NEJMoa052256)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16855265?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 67 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
13. Dunlay SM, Roger VL, Redfield MM. Epidemiology of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.
Nat Rev Cardiol. 2017 Oct;14(10):591-602.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1038/nrcardio.2017.65)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28492288?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Bhatia RS, Tu JV, Lee DS, et al. Outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction in a
population-based study. N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 20;355(3):260-9.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/10.1056/NEJMoa051530)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16855266?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Lenzen MJ, Scholte op Reimer WJ, Boersma E, et al. Differences between patients with a preserved
and a depressed left ventricular function: a report from the EuroHeart Failure Survey. Eur Heart
J. 2004;25:1214-1220.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/25/14/1214/509370/
Differences-between-patients-with-a-preserved-and)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15246639?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Tarantini L, Faggiano P, Senni M, et al. Clinical features and prognosis associated with a
preserved left ventricular systolic function in a large cohort of congestive heart failure outpatients
managed by cardiologists: data from the Italian Network on Congestive Heart Failure. Ital
Heart J. 2002 Nov;3(11):656-64. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12506524?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Masoudi FA, Havranek EP, Smith G, et al. Gender, age, and heart failure with preserved
left ventricular systolic function. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Jan 15;41(2):217-23.  Full text
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109702026967)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12535812?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Screever EM, van der Wal MHL, van Veldhuisen DJ, et al. Comorbidities complicating heart failure:
changes over the last 15 years. Clin Res Cardiol. 2023 Jan;112(1):123-33.  Full text (https://
link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00392-022-02076-1)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35976430?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Lam CS, Donal E, Kraigher-Krainer E, et al. Epidemiology and clinical course of heart failure
with preserved ejection fraction. Eur J Heart Fail. 2011 Jan;13(1):18-28.  Full text (http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1093/eurjhf/hfq121/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20685685?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Hess OM, Grimm J, Krayenbuehl HP. Diastolic simple elastic and viscoelastic properties of the
left ventricle in man. Circulation. 1979 Jun;59(6):1178-87.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/pdf/10.1161/01.CIR.59.6.1178)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/436211?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Sanderson JE, Gibson DG, Brown DJ, et al. Left ventricular filling in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
An angiographic study. Br Heart J. 1977 Jun;39(6):661-70.  Full text (http://heart.bmj.com/
content/heartjnl/39/6/661.full.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/141933?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO, et al. (eds). Braunwald's heart disease: a textbook of cardiovascular
medicine. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2005.
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
67
=== Page 68 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
REFERENCES
23. Paulus WJ, Tschöpe C. A novel paradigm for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction:
comorbidities drive myocardial dysfunction and remodeling through coronary microvascular endothelial
inflammation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013 Jul 23;62(4):263-71.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0735109713018901?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23684677?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Shah SJ, Kitzman DW, Borlaug BA, et al. Phenotype-specific treatment of heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction: a multiorgan roadmap. Circulation. 2016 Jul 5;134(1):73-90.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4930115)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27358439?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Vasan RS, Benjamin EJ, Levy D. Congestive heart failure with normal left ventricular systolic function:
clinical approaches to the diagnosis and treatment of diastolic heart failure. Arch Intern Med. 1996 Jan
22;156(2):146-57. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8546548?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Smit MD, Moes ML, Maass AH, et al. The importance of whether atrial fibrillation or heart failure
develops first. Eur J Heart Fail. 2012 Sep;14(9):1030-40.  Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/full/10.1093/eurjhf/hfs097)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22733981?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Zile MR, Brutsaert DL. New concepts in diastolic dysfunction and diastolic heart failure:
Part I: diagnosis, prognosis, and measurements of diastolic function. Circulation. 2002 Mar
19;105(11):1387-93.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/hc1102.105289)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11901053?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Zile MR, Brutsaert DL. New concepts in diastolic dysfunction and diastolic heart failure: Part II:
causal mechanisms and treatment. Circulation. 2002 Mar 26;105(12):1503-8.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/hc1202.105290)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11914262?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Stolfo D, Uijl A, Vedin O, et al. Sex-based differences in heart failure across the ejection fraction
spectrum: phenotyping, and prognostic and therapeutic implications. JACC Heart Fail. 2019
Jun;7(6):505-15.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2213177919302318)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31146874?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Pulignano G, Del Sindaco D, Tavazzi L, et al. Clinical features and outcomes of elderly outpatients with
heart failure followed up in hospital cardiology units: data from a large nationwide cardiology database
(IN-CHF Registry). Am Heart J. 2002 Jan;143(1):45-55. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11773911?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Hogg K, Swedberg K, McMurray J. Heart failure with preserved left ventricular systolic function;
epidemiology, clinical characteristics, and prognosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004 Feb 4;43(3):317-27. 
Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/43/3/317)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15013109?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Okura Y, Ohno Y, Ramadan MM, et al. Characterization of outpatients with isolated diastolic
dysfunction and evaluation of the burden in a Japanese community. Circ J. 2007 Jul;71(7):1013-21.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17587704?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 69 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
33. Borlaug BA, Jensen MD, Kitzman DW, et al. Obesity and heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction: new insights and pathophysiological targets. Cardiovasc Res. 2023 Feb 3;118(18):3434-50. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/cardiovascres/article/118/18/3434/6649894)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35880317?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Burden S, Weedon B, Whaymand L, et al. The effect of overweight/obesity on diastolic function
in children and adolescents: a meta-analysis. Clin Obes. 2021 Oct;11(5):e12476.  Full text
(https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cob.12476)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34278720?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Ammar KA, Redfield MM, Mahoney DW, et al. Central obesity: association with left ventricular
dysfunction and mortality in the community. Am Heart J. 2008 Nov;156(5):975-81. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19061715?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. John JE, Claggett B, Skali H, et al. Coronary artery disease and heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction: the ARIC study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022 Sep 6;11(17):e021660.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/JAHA.121.021660)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36000416?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. McHugh K, DeVore AD, Wu J, et al. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction and
diabetes: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019 Feb 12;73(5):602-11.  Full
text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109718393987)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30732715?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Dunlay SM, Givertz MM, Aguilar D, et al. Type 2 diabetes mellitus and heart failure: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association and the Heart Failure Society of America: this
statement does not represent an update of the 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA heart failure guideline
update. Circulation. 2019 Aug 13;140(7):e294-324.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/
full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000691)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31167558?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Pop-Busui R, Januzzi JL, Bruemmer D, et al. Heart failure: an underappreciated complication
of diabetes. A consensus report of the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes Care. 2022
Jul 7;45(7):1670-90.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.2337/dci22-0014)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35796765?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Hayashi SY, Rohani M, Lindholm B, et al. Left ventricular function in patients with chronic kidney
disease evaluated by colour tissue Doppler velocity imaging. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2006
Jan;21(1):125-32.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/ndt/article/21/1/125/1818905/Left-ventricular-
function-in-patients-with-chronic)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16221719?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Unger ED, Dubin RF, Deo R, et al. Association of chronic kidney disease with abnormal cardiac
mechanics and adverse outcomes in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction. Eur
J Heart Fail. 2016 Jan;18(1):103-12.  Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ejhf.445)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26635076?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Patel RN, Sharma A, Prasad A, et al. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction with CKD:
a narrative review of a multispecialty disorder. Kidney Med. 2023 Dec;5(12):100705.  Full text
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
69
=== Page 70 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
REFERENCES
(https://www.kidneymedicinejournal.org/article/S2590-0595(23)00123-1/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38046909?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. van de Wouw J, Broekhuizen M, Sorop O, et al. Chronic kidney disease as a risk factor for
heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a focus on microcirculatory factors and therapeutic
targets. Front Physiol. 2019;10:1108.  Full text (https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/physiology/
articles/10.3389/fphys.2019.01108/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31551803?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Shah SJ, Katz DH, Selvaraj S, et al. Phenomapping for novel classification of heart failure
with preserved ejection fraction. Circulation. 2015 Jan 20;131(3):269-79.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.010637)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25398313?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Chang HM, Moudgil R, Scarabelli T, et al. Cardiovascular complications of cancer therapy:
best practices in diagnosis, prevention, and management: Part 1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 Nov
14;70(20):2536-51.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109717409971)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29145954?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Purwowiyoto SL, Prawara AS. Metabolic syndrome and heart failure: mechanism and management.
Med Pharm Rep. 2021 Jan;94(1):15-21.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC7880077)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33629043?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Ndumele CE, Rangaswami J, Chow SL, et al. Cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic health: a presidential
advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023 Nov 14;148(20):1606-35. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001184)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37807924?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Ndumele CE, Neeland IJ, Tuttle KR, et al. A synopsis of the evidence for the science and clinical
management of cardiovascular-kidney-metabolic (CKM) syndrome: a scientific statement from
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023 Nov 14;148(20):1636-64.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001186)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37807920?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Chan J, Sanderson J, Chan W, et al. Prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in diastolic heart
failure. Chest. 1997 Jun;111(6):1488-93. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9187161?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Kim SH, Cho GY, Shin C, et al. Impact of obstructive sleep apnea on left ventricular diastolic function.
Am J Cardiol. 2008 Jun 1;101(11):1663-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18489948?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Otto ME, Belohlavek M, Romero-Corral A, et al. Comparison of cardiac structural and functional
changes in obese otherwise healthy adults with versus without obstructive sleep apnea. Am J
Cardiol. 2007 May 1;99(9):1298-302. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17478161?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of
cardiovascular disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
70 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 71 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
Task Force on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2019 Sep 10;140(11):e596-646.  Full
text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000678)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30879355?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Lloyd-Jones DM, Allen NB, Anderson CAM, et al. Life's Essential 8: Updating and Enhancing
the American Heart Association's Construct of Cardiovascular Health: A Presidential Advisory
From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2022 Aug 2;146(5):e18-e43.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001078)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35766027?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Sciarretta S, Palano F, Tocci G, et al. Antihypertensive treatment and development of heart failure
in hypertension: a Bayesian network meta-analysis of studies in patients with hypertension and high
cardiovascular risk. Arch Intern Med. 2011 Mar 14;171(5):384-94.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/226833)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21059964?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Upadhya B, Stacey RB, Kitzman DW. Preventing heart failure by treating systolic hypertension:
what does the SPRINT add? Curr Hypertens Rep. 2019 Jan 18;21(1):9. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30659372?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. US Preventive Services Task Force. Healthy diet and physical activity for cardiovascular disease
prevention in adults with cardiovascular risk factors: behavioral counseling interventions. November
2020 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/
recommendation/healthy-diet-and-physical-activity-counseling-adults-with-high-risk-of-cvd)
57. US Preventive Services Task Force. Healthy diet and physical activity for cardiovascular disease
prevention in adults without cardiovascular disease risk factors: behavioral counseling interventions.
July 2022 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/
recommendation/healthy-lifestyle-and-physical-activity-for-cvd-prevention-adults-without-known-risk-
factors-behavioral-counseling)
58. Jurgens CY, Lee CS, Aycock DM, et al. State of the science: the relevance of symptoms
in cardiovascular disease and research: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2022 Sep 20;146(12):e173-e184.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/
CIR.0000000000001089)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35979825?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Criteria Committee of the New York Heart Association. Nomenclature and criteria for diagnosis of
diseases of the heart and great vessels. 9th ed. Boston, MA: Little, Brown & Co; 1964:253-6.
60. Reddy YNV, Kaye DM, Handoko ML, et al. Diagnosis of heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction among patients with unexplained dyspnea. JAMA Cardiol. 2022 Sep 1;7(9):891-99.  Full
text (https://www.doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2022.1916)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35830183?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Reddy YNV, Carter RE, Obokata M, et al. A simple, evidence-based approach to help guide diagnosis
of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circulation. 2018 Aug 28;138(9):861-70.  Full text
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
71
=== Page 72 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
REFERENCES
(https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.034646)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29792299?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Pieske B, Tschöpe C, de Boer RA, et al. How to diagnose heart failure with preserved ejection fraction:
the HFA-PEFF diagnostic algorithm: a consensus recommendation from the Heart Failure Association
(HFA) of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2019 Oct 21;40(40):3297-3317. 
Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehz641)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31504452?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Verbrugge FH, Omote K, Reddy YNV, et al. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction in patients
with normal natriuretic peptide levels is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Eur Heart
J. 2022 May 21;43(20):1941-51.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9649913)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35139159?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64. Anjan VY, Loftus TM, Burke MA, et al. Prevalence, clinical phenotype, and outcomes associated with
normal B-type natriuretic peptide levels in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Am J Cardiol.
2012 Sep 15;110(6):870-6.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.amjcard.2012.05.014)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22681864?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
65. Feola M, Aspromonte N, Canali C, et al. Prognostic value of plasma brain natriuretic peptide, urea
nitrogen, and creatinine in outpatients >70 years of age with heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2005 Sep
1;96(5):705-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16125500?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. van Veldhuisen DJ, Linssen GC, Jaarsma T, et al. B-type natriuretic peptide and prognosis in
heart failure patients with preserved and reduced ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013 Apr
9;61(14):1498-506.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/61/14/1498)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23500300?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Myhre PL, Vaduganathan M, Claggett B, et al. B-type natriuretic peptide during treatment with
sacubitril/valsartan: the PARADIGM-HF trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019 Mar 26;73(11):1264-72.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/pmid/30846338)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30846338?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. Kirkpatrick JN, Vannan MA, Narula J, et al. Echocardiography in heart failure: applications,
utility, and new horizons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:381-396.  Full text (http://
www.onlinejacc.org/content/50/5/381)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17662389?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
69. Nagueh SF, Appleton CP, Gillebert TC, et al. Recommendations for the evaluation of left ventricular
diastolic function by echocardiography. Eur J Echocardiogr. 2009;10:165-193.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/ehjcimaging/article/10/2/165/2399815/Recommendations-for-the-Evaluation-of-
Left)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19270053?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. Chamsi-Pasha MA, Zhan Y, Debs D, et al. CMR in the evaluation of diastolic dysfunction and
phenotyping of HFpEF: current role and future perspectives. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2020
Jan;13(1 pt 2):283-96.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmg.2019.02.031)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31202753?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 73 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
71. Anker SD, Comin Colet J, Filippatos G, et al; FAIR-HF Trial Investigators. Ferric carboxymaltose
in patients with heart failure and iron deficiency. N Engl J Med. 2009 Dec 17;361(25):2436-48. 
Full text (http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa0908355#t=article)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19920054?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Ponikowski P, van Veldhuisen DJ, Comin-Colet J, et al; CONFIRM-HF Investigators. Beneficial
effects of long-term intravenous iron therapy with ferric carboxymaltose in patients with symptomatic
heart failure and iron deficiency. Eur Heart J. 2015 Mar 14;36(11):657-68.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/36/11/657/491882/Beneficial-effects-of-long-term-intravenous-iron)
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25176939?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Rathi VK, Doyle M, Yamrozik J, et al. Routine evaluation of left ventricular diastolic function by
cardiovascular magnetic resonance: a practical approach. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2008 Jul
8;10:36.  Full text (https://jcmr-online.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1532-429X-10-36)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18611254?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74. Marsan NA, Westenberg JJ, Tops LF, et al. Comparison between tissue Doppler imaging and velocity-
encoded magnetic resonance imaging for measurement of myocardial velocities, assessment of left
ventricular dyssynchrony, and estimation of left ventricular filling pressures in patients with ischemic
cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol. 2008 Nov 15;102(10):1366-72. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18993157?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
75. Muntwyler J, Abetel G, Gruner C, et al. One-year mortality among unselected outpatients with
heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2002 Dec;23(23):1861-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12445535?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. McKee PA, Castelli WP, McNamara PM, et al. The natural history of congestive heart failure: the
Framingham study. N Engl J Med. 1971 Dec 23;285(26):1441-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/5122894?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
77. Writing Committee, Hollenberg SM, Stevenson LW, et al. 2024 ACC expert consensus decision
pathway on clinical assessment, management, and trajectory of patients hospitalized with heart failure
focused update: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2024 Sep 24;84(13):1241-67.  Full text (https://www.jacc.org/doi/10.1016/
j.jacc.2024.06.002)
78. American College of Radiology. ACR appropriateness criteria: suspected and known heart failure.
2024 [internet publication].  Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3102383/Narrative)
79. Smiseth OA, Morris DA, Cardim N, et al. Multimodality imaging in patients with heart failure
and preserved ejection fraction: an expert consensus document of the European Association
of Cardiovascular Imaging. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2022 Jan 24;23(2):e34-e61. 
Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1093/ehjci/jeab154)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34729586?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Acute heart failure: diagnosis and management.
November 2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg187)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
73
=== Page 74 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
REFERENCES
81. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Chronic heart failure in adults: diagnosis and
management. September 2018 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
ng106)
82. Aggarwal M, Bozkurt B, Panjrath G, et al. Lifestyle modifications for preventing and
treating heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Nov 6;72(19):2391-405.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2018.08.2160)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30384895?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
83. Hieda M, Sarma S, Hearon CM Jr, et al. One-year committed exercise training reverses abnormal
left ventricular myocardial stiffness in patients with stage B heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction. Circulation. 2021 Sep 21;144(12):934-46.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.121.054117)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34543068?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
84. Kang DS, Sung JH, Kim D, et al. Association between exercise habit changes and mortality
following a cardiovascular event. Heart. 2022 Nov 24;108(24):1945-51.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1136/heartjnl-2022-320882)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35589378?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
85. Sachdev V, Sharma K, Keteyian SJ, et al. Supervised exercise training for chronic heart
failure with preserved ejection fraction: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association and American College of Cardiology. Circulation. 2023 Apr 18;147(16):e699-715. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001122?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36943925?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
86. Paluch AE, Boyer WR, Franklin BA, et al. Resistance exercise training in individuals with and
without cardiovascular disease: 2023 update: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2024 Jan 16;149(3):e217-31.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/
full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001189)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38059362?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
87. Thomas RJ, Beatty AL, Beckie TM, et al. Home-based cardiac rehabilitation: a scientific statement
from the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation, the American
Heart Association, and the American College of Cardiology. Circulation. 2019 Jul 2;140(1):e69-89. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000663)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31082266?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
88. McDonagh ST, Dalal H, Moore S, et al. Home-based versus centre-based cardiac rehabilitation.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2023 Oct 27;10(10):CD007130. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37888805?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
89. Golbus JR, Lopez-Jimenez F, Barac A, et al. Digital technologies in cardiac rehabilitation: a science
advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023 Jul 4;148(1):95-107.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001150)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37272365?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 75 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
90. Ezekowitz JA, Colin-Ramirez E, Ross H, et al; SODIUM-HF Investigators. Reduction of dietary sodium
to less than 100 mmol in heart failure (SODIUM-HF): an international, open-label, randomised,
controlled trial. Lancet. 2022 Apr 9;399(10333):1391-400. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35381194?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
91. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Dapagliflozin for treating chronic heart failure
with preserved or mildly reduced ejection fraction. Jun 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta902)
92. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Empagliflozin for treating chronic heart failure
with preserved or mildly reduced ejection fraction. Nov 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta929)
93. Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al. Empagliflozin in heart failure with a preserved ejection fraction.
N Engl J Med. 2021 Oct 14;385(16):1451-61.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2107038)
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34449189?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
94. Filippatos G, Butler J, Farmakis D, et al. Empagliflozin for heart failure with preserved left ventricular
ejection fraction with and without diabetes. Circulation. 2022 Aug 30;146(9):676-86.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059785)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35762322?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
95. Ferreira JP, Zannad F, Butler J, et al. Association of empagliflozin treatment with albuminuria levels
in patients with heart failure: a secondary analysis of EMPEROR-Pooled. JAMA Cardiol. 2022 Nov
1;7(11):1148-59.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2022.2924)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36129693?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
96. Butler J, Packer M, Siddiqi TJ, et al. Efficacy of empagliflozin in patients with heart failure
across kidney risk categories. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 May 16;81(19):1902-14.  Full text (https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109723050805?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37164523?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
97. Packer M, Butler J, Zeller C, et al. Blinded withdrawal of long-term randomized treatment with
empagliflozin or placebo in patients with heart failure. Circulation. 2023 Sep 26;148(13):1011-22.  Full
text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10516173)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37621153?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
98. Packer M, Butler J, Zannad F, et al. Effect of empagliflozin on worsening heart failure events in
patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: EMPEROR-Preserved trial. Circulation.
2021 Oct 19;144(16):1284-94.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.056824)
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34459213?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
99. Butler J, Filippatos G, Jamal Siddiqi T, et al. Empagliflozin, health status, and quality of life in patients
with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: the EMPEROR-Preserved trial. Circulation. 2022 Jan
18;145(3):184-93.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.121.057812)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34779658?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
100. Butler J, Filippatos G, Siddiqi TJ, et al. Effects of empagliflozin in women and men with heart
failure and preserved ejection fraction. Circulation. 2022 Oct 4;146(14):1046-55.  Full text (https://
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
75
=== Page 76 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
REFERENCES
www.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059755)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36098051?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
101. Böhm M, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al. Empagliflozin improves outcomes in patients with heart failure
and preserved ejection fraction irrespective of age. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Jul 5;80(1):1-18. 
Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2022.04.040)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35772911?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
102. Butler J, Usman MS, Filippatos G, et al. Safety and efficacy of empagliflozin and diuretic use in
patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: a post hoc analysis of the EMPEROR-
preserved trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2023 Jul 1;8(7):640-9.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC10209829)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37223933?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
103. Nassif ME, Windsor SL, Borlaug BA, et al. The SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin in heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction: a multicenter randomized trial. Nat Med. 2021 Nov;27(11):1954-60. 
Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1038/s41591-021-01536-x)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34711976?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
104. Nassif ME, Windsor SL, Gosch K, et al. Dapagliflozin improves heart failure symptoms and
physical limitations across the full range of ejection fraction: pooled patient-level analysis from
DEFINE-HF and PRESERVED-HF trials. Circ Heart Fail. 2023 Jul;16(7):e009837.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/pmid/37203441)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/37203441?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
105. Solomon SD, McMurray JJV, Claggett B, et al. Dapagliflozin in heart failure with mildly reduced
or preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2022 Sep 22;387(12):1089-98.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2206286)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36027570?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
106. Cunningham JW, Vaduganathan M, Claggett BL, et al. Dapagliflozin in patients recently hospitalized
with heart failure and mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Oct
4;80(14):1302-10.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2022.07.021)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36041912?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
107. Vaduganathan M, Claggett BL, Jhund P, et al. Time to clinical benefit of dapagliflozin in patients
with heart failure wth mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction: a prespecified secondary
analysis of the DELIVER randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2022 Dec 1;7(12):1259-63.  Full
text (https://www.doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2022.3750)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36190011?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
108. Desai AS, Jhund PS, Claggett BL, et al. Effect of dapagliflozin on cause-specific mortality in
patients with heart failure across the spectrum of ejection fraction: a participant-level pooled
analysis of DAPA-HF and DELIVER. JAMA Cardiol. 2022 Dec 1;7(12):1227-34.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1001/jamacardio.2022.3736)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36189985?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
109. Mc Causland FR, Claggett BL, Vaduganathan M, et al. Dapagliflozin and kidney outcomes in
patients with heart failure with mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction: a prespecified analysis
76 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 77 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
of the DELIVER randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2023 Jan 1;8(1):56-65. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36326604?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
110. Inzucchi SE, Claggett BL, Vaduganathan M, et al. Efficacy and safety of dapagliflozin in patients
with heart failure with mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction by baseline glycaemic status
(DELIVER): a subgroup analysis from an international, multicentre, double-blind, randomised,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2022 Dec;10(12):869-81. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36372069?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
111. Yang M, Butt JH, Kondo T, et al. Dapagliflozin in patients with heart failure with mildly reduced and
preserved ejection fraction treated with a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist or sacubitril/valsartan.
Eur J Heart Fail. 2022 Dec;24(12):2307-19.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1002/ejhf.2722)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36342375?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
112. Jhund PS, Claggett BL, Talebi A, et al. Effect of dapagliflozin on total heart failure events in patients
with heart failure with mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction: a prespecified analysis of the
DELIVER trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2023 Jun 1;8(6):554-63.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC10134044)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37099283?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
113. Kondo T, Jering KS, Borleffs CJW, et al. Patient characteristics, outcomes, and effects of
dapagliflozin according to the duration of heart failure: a prespecified analysis of the DELIVER
trial. Circulation. 2023 Apr 4;147(14):1067-78.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.122.062918?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub
%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36876483?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
114. Chatur S, Vaduganathan M, Claggett BL, et al. Outpatient worsening among patients with mildly
reduced and preserved ejection fraction heart failure in the DELIVER trial. Circulation. 2023 Nov
28;148(22):1735-45.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/pmid/37632455)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37632455?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
115. Chatur S, Vaduganathan M, Claggett B, et al. Dapagliflozin and diuretic utilization in heart failure
with mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction: the DELIVER trial. Eur Heart J. 2023 Aug
14;44(31):2930-43.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10484057)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37220093?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
116. Kosiborod MN, Bhatt AS, Claggett BL, et al. Effect of dapagliflozin on health status in patients with
preserved or mildly reduced ejection fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 Feb 7;81(5):460-73.  Full text
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109722073144?via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36526515?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
117. Peikert A, Chandra A, Kosiborod MN, et al. Association of dapagliflozin vs placebo with individual
Kansas City cardiomyopathy questionnaire components in patients with heart failure with mildly
reduced or preserved ejection fraction: a secondary analysis of the DELIVER trial. JAMA Cardiol.
2023 Jul 1;8(7):684-90.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/pmid/37208998)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37208998?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
77
=== Page 78 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
REFERENCES
118. Butt JH, Jhund PS, Belohlávek J, et al. Efficacy and safety of dapagliflozin according to frailty
in patients with heart failure: a prespecified analysis of the DELIVER trial. Circulation. 2022 Oct
18;146(16):1210-24.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.061754)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36029465?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
119. Adamson C, Kondo T, Jhund PS, et al. Dapagliflozin for heart failure according to body
mass index: the DELIVER trial. Eur Heart J. 2022 Nov 1;43(41):4406-17.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehac481)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36029309?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
120. Wang X, Vaduganathan M, Claggett BL, et al. Sex differences in characteristics, outcomes, and
treatment response with dapagliflozin across the range of ejection fraction in patients with heart
failure: insights from DAPA-HF and DELIVER. Circulation. 2023 Feb 21;147(8):624-34. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36342789?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
121. Vaduganathan M, Docherty KF, Claggett BL, et al. SGLT-2 inhibitors in patients with heart
failure: a comprehensive meta-analysis of five randomised controlled trials. Lancet. 2022
Sep 3;400(10354):757-67. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36041474?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
122. Cardoso R, Graffunder FP, Ternes CMP, et al. SGLT2 inhibitors decrease cardiovascular death and
heart failure hospitalizations in patients with heart failure: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
EClinicalMedicine. 2021 Jun;36:100933.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2021.100933) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34308311?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
123. Banerjee M, Pal R, Nair K, et al. SGLT2 inhibitors and cardiovascular outcomes in heart failure with
mildly reduced and preserved ejection fraction: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Indian Heart
J. 2023 Mar-Apr;75(2):122-7.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10123444)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36914068?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
124. Usman MS, Siddiqi TJ, Anker SD, et al. Effect of SGLT2 inhibitors on cardiovascular outcomes
across various patient populations. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2023 Jun 27;81(25):2377-87. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37344038?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
125. Xiang B, Zhang R, Wu X, et al. Optimal pharmacologic treatment of heart failure with preserved and
mildly reduced ejection fraction: a meta-analysis. JAMA Netw Open. 2022 Sep 1;5(9):e2231963. 
Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.31963)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36125813?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
126. Gupta K, Spertus JA, Birmingham M, et al. Racial differences in quality of life in patients with
heart failure treated with sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors: a patient-level meta-
analysis of the CHIEF-HF, DEFINE-HF, and PRESERVED-HF trials. Circulation. 2023 Jul
18;148(3):220-8.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.063263?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37191040?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
127. Martin N, Manoharan K, Davies C, et al. Beta-blockers and inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin
aldosterone system for chronic heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Cochrane Database Syst
78 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 79 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
Rev. 2021 May 22;5(5):CD012721.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD012721.pub3) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34022072?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
128. Pitt B, Pfeffer MA, Assmann SF, et al. Spironolactone for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.
N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 10;370(15):1383-92.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1313731)
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24716680?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
129. Pfeffer MA, Claggett B, Assmann SF, et al. Regional variation in patients and outcomes in
the Treatment of Preserved Cardiac Function Heart Failure With an Aldosterone Antagonist
(TOPCAT) trial. Circulation. 2015 Jan 6;131(1):34-42.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.114.013255)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25406305?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
130. Solomon SD, Claggett B, Lewis EF, et al. Influence of ejection fraction on outcomes and efficacy
of spironolactone in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J. 2016
Feb 1;37(5):455-62.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehv464)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26374849?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
131. Solomon SD, McMurray JJV, Anand IS, et al. Angiotensin-neprilysin inhibition in heart failure
with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2019 Oct 24;381(17):1609-20.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1908655)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31475794?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
132. McMurray JJV, Jackson AM, Lam CSP, et al. Effects of sacubitril-valsartan versus valsartan
in women compared with men with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: insights from
PARAGON-HF. Circulation. 2020 Feb 4;141(5):338-51.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.119.044491)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31736337?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
133. Pieske B, Wachter R, Shah SJ, et al. Effect of sacubitril/valsartan vs standard medical therapies
on plasma NT-proBNP concentration and submaximal exercise capacity in patients with heart
failure and preserved ejection fraction: the PARALLAX randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2021 Nov
16;326(19):1919-29.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2021.18463)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34783839?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
134. Yusuf S, Pfeffer MA, Swedberg K, et al. Effects of candesartan in patients with chronic heart
failure and preserved left-ventricular ejection fraction: the CHARM-preserved trial. Lancet.
2003 Sep 6;362(9386):777-81. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13678871?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
135. Powell-Wiley TM, Poirier P, Burke LE, et al. Obesity and cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2021 May 25;143(21):e984-e1010.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000973)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33882682?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
136. Lunney M, Ruospo M, Natale P, et al. Pharmacological interventions for heart failure in people
with chronic kidney disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020 Feb 27;2(2):CD012466.  Full text
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
79
=== Page 80 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
REFERENCES
(https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD012466.pub2/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32103487?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
137. Philbin EF, Santella RN, Rocco TA Jr. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor use in older patients
with heart failure and renal dysfunction. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1999 Mar;47(3):302-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10078892?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
138. Risler T, Schwab A, Kramer B, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of loop
diuretics in renal failure. Cardiology. 1994;84 Suppl 2:155-61. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7954539?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
139. Kosiborod MN, Abildstrøm SZ, Borlaug BA, et al. Semaglutide in patients with heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction and obesity. N Engl J Med. 2023 Sep 21;389(12):1069-84. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37622681?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
140. Borlaug BA, Kitzman DW, Davies MJ, et al. Semaglutide in HFpEF across obesity class and
by body weight reduction: a prespecified analysis of the STEP-HFpEF trial. Nat Med. 2023
Sep;29(9):2358-65.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10504076)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37635157?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
141. Udelson JE, Lewis GD, Shah SJ, et al. Effect of praliciguat on peak rate of oxygen consumption in
patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: the CAPACITY HFpEF randomized clinical
trial. JAMA. 2020 Oct 20;324(15):1522-31.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.16641)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33079154?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
142. Adamson PB, Abraham WT, Bourge RC, et al. Wireless pulmonary artery pressure monitoring
guides management to reduce decompensation in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.
Circ Heart Fail. 2014 Nov;7(6):935-44.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/
CIRCHEARTFAILURE.113.001229?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub
%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25286913?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
143. Lindenfeld J, Zile MR, Desai AS, et al. Haemodynamic-guided management of heart failure (GUIDE-
HF): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2021 Sep 11;398(10304):991-1001. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34461042?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
144. Writing Committee, Maddox TM, Januzzi JL Jr, et al. 2021 update to the 2017 ACC expert consensus
decision pathway for optimization of heart failure treatment: answers to 10 pivotal issues about
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution
Set Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021 Feb 16;77(6):772-810.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.11.022)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33446410?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
145. O'Meara E, McDonald M, Chan M, et al. CCS/CHFS heart failure guidelines: clinical trial update on
functional mitral regurgitation, SGLT2 inhibitors, ARNI in HFpEF, and tafamidis in amyloidosis. Can J
Cardiol. 2020 Feb;36(2):159-69.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.cjca.2019.11.036)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32036861?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 81 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
146. Cleland JG, Taylor J, Freemantle N, et al. Relationship between plasma concentrations of N-
terminal pro brain natriuretic peptide and the characteristics and outcome of patients with a clinical
diagnosis of diastolic heart failure: a report from the PEP-CHF study. Eur J Heart Fail. 2012
May;14(5):487-94.  Full text (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1093/eurjhf/hfs049/full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22505395?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
147. von Haehling S, van Veldhuisen DJ, Roughton M, Babalis D, et al. Anaemia among patients with heart
failure and preserved or reduced ejection fraction: results from the SENIORS study. Eur J Heart Fail.
2011 Jun;13(6):656-63.  Full text (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1093/eurjhf/hfr044/full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21613429?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
148. Rutledge T, Reis VA, Linke SE, et al. Depression in heart failure: a meta-analytic review of prevalence,
intervention effects, and associations with clinical outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:1527-1537. 
Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/48/8/1527)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17045884?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
149. Gottlieb SS, Kop WJ, Ellis SJ, et al; HF-ACTION Investigators. Relation of depression to severity of
illness in heart failure (from Heart Failure And a Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes of Exercise
Training [HF-ACTION]). Am J Cardiol. 2009;103:1285-1289.  Full text (http://www.ajconline.org/article/
S0002-9149%2809%2900119-2/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19406273?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
150. Jiang W, Kuchibhatla M, Clary GL, et al. Relationship between depressive symptoms and long-
term mortality in patients with heart failure. Am Heart J. 2007;154:102-108. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17584561?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
151. Johnson TJ, Basu S, Pisani BA, et al. Depression predicts repeated heart failure hospitalizations.
J Card Fail. 2012 Mar;18(3):246-52. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22385946?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
152. Somaratne JB, Whalley GA, Poppe KK, et al. Pseudonormal mitral filling is associated with similarly
poor prognosis as restrictive filling in patients with heart failure and coronary heart disease:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2009
May;22(5):494-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19307097?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
153. Al-Khatib SM, Shaw LK, O'Connor C, et al. Incidence and predictors of sudden cardiac death in
patients with diastolic heart failure. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2007 Dec;18(12):1231-5. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17883404?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
154. Lai YC, Wang L, Gladwin MT. Insights into the pulmonary vascular complications of heart
failure with preserved ejection fraction. J Physiol. 2019 Feb;597(4):1143-56.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1113/JP275858)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30549058?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
155. Brittain EL, Thenappan T, Huston JH, et al. Elucidating the clinical implications and pathophysiology
of pulmonary hypertension in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a call to action: a science
advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2022 Aug 16;146(7):e73-e88.  Full text
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
81
=== Page 82 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction References
REFERENCES
(https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001079)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35862198?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
156. Sidhu K, Sanjanwala R, Zieroth S. Hyperkalemia in heart failure. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2020
Mar;35(2):150-5.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/pmid/31833959)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31833959?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
157. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of
high blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint
National Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014 Feb 5;311(5):507-20.  Full text (http://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jama/fullarticle/1791497)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24352797?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
158. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/
ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high
blood pressure in adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 May 15;71(19):e127-248.  Full text (http://
www.onlinejacc.org/content/71/19/e127)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29146535?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
159. Williams B, Mancia G, Spiering W, et al. 2018 ESC/ESH Guidelines for the management
of arterial hypertension. Eur Heart J. 2018 Sep 1;39(33):3021-104.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehy339)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30165516?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
160. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Hypertension in adults: diagnosis and management.
Nov 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng136)
161. Chow SL, Bozkurt B, Baker WL, et al. Complementary and alternative medicines in the management
of heart failure: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023 Jan
10;147(2):e4-e30.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001110)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36475715?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
162. Melgar M, Britton A, Roper LE, et al. Use of respiratory syncytial virus vaccines in older adults:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices - United States, 2023.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2023 Jul 21;72(29):793-801.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC10360650)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37471262?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
163. Taylor RS, Davies EJ, Dalal HM, et al. Effects of exercise training for heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction: a systematic review and meta-analysis of comparative studies. Int
J Cardiol. 2012 Dec 15;162(1):6-13. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22664368?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 83 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Images
Images
Figure 1: Prevalence of individual chronic conditions in heart failure patients with preserved and reduced
ejection fraction. Left panel, men; right panel, women
Chamberlain AM, et al. Am J Med. 2015 Jan; 128(1): 38-45; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
83
=== Page 84 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Images
IMAGES
Figure 2: Impaired relaxation: mitral inflow showing E/A reversal
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
84 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 85 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Images
Figure 3: Pseudonormalization of E/A mitral inflow
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
85
=== Page 86 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Images
IMAGES
Figure 4: Valsalva technique confirming impaired relaxation
From the collection of Dr Marc Del Rosario
86 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 87 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Images
Figure 5: Tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) of the basal LV showing increased E/E'
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
87
=== Page 88 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Images
IMAGES
Figure 6: Mitral inflow confirming restrictive filling
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
88 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 89 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Images
Figure 7: CMR of patient with cardiac amyloid infiltration. Following injection of gadolinium contrast, in the late
phase there is subendocardial basal ring in the left ventricle (4-chamber view)
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
89
=== Page 90 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Images
IMAGES
Figure 8: CMR of patient with cardiac amyloid infiltration. Following injection of gadolinium contrast, in the late
phase there is subendocardial basal ring in the left ventricle (short-axis basal image)
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
90 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 91 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Images
Figure 9: CMR (cardiac magnetic resonance) imaging demonstrating restrictive cardiomyopathy with biatrial
dilatation and mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
91
=== Page 92 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Images
IMAGES
Figure 10: CMR (cardiac magnetic resonance) imaging confirming left atrial enlargement and left ventricular
hypertrophy (LVH)
From the collection of Dr Jessica Webb; used with permission
92 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 93 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Disclaimer
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
93
=== Page 94 ===
Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
94 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 08, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 95 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Syed Wamique Yusuf, FACC, FRCPI
Professor of Medicine
Department of Cardiology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
DISCLOSURES: SWY declares that he has no competing interests.
Carl Zehner, MD
Assistant Professor of Medicine
Department of Cardiology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
DISCLOSURES: CZ declares that he has no competing interests.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Syed Wamique Yusuf and Dr Carl Zehner would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Gerald Carr-White, Dr
Jessica Webb, Dr Gerard Aurigemma, Dr Lokesh Tejwani, Dr Marc E. Del Rosario, and Dr Kul Aggarwal,
previous contributors to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: GCW has been reimbursed by Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Medtronic, St Jude, and Sanofi
for attending conferences. He has attended Advisory Boards for Medtronic, St Jude, Novartis, Shire, Sanofi,
and Servier. JW has a joint working venture with BI for a community pharmacist post. GA, LT, MEDR, and
KA declare that they have no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Edward Geltman, MD
Professor of Medicine
Cardiovascular Division, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
DISCLOSURES: EG has lectured for Novartis, Forest, Merck, and Pfizer.
Jerry Murphy, MB, BS, DM, FRCP
Consultant Cardiologist
Darlington Memorial Hospital, Darlington, UK
DISCLOSURES: Not disclosed.
