# Kawasaki disease

=== Page 1 ===
Kawasaki disease
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Dec 14, 2022
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Etiology  4
Pathophysiology  5
Classification  6
Case history  7
Diagnosis  9
Approach  9
History and exam  13
Risk factors  14
Investigations  16
Differentials  19
Criteria  23
Management  25
Approach  25
Treatment algorithm overview  34
Treatment algorithm  37
Emerging  59
Secondary prevention  59
Patient discussions  60
Follow up  61
Monitoring  61
Complications  62
Prognosis  66
Guidelines  67
Diagnostic guidelines  67
Treatment guidelines  67
References  68
Images  78
Disclaimer  80
=== Page 3 ===
Kawasaki disease Overview
Summary
Kawasaki disease is the second most common vasculitis in childhood (the most common being IgA
vasculitis).
Presents with an acute self-limiting febrile illness usually in young children, and is the leading cause of
acquired heart disease in children ages under 5 years in the developed world.
Classic features include fever, rash, conjunctivitis, lymphadenopathy, changes to the lips or oral mucosal,
and peripheries, with initial swelling and erythema followed by desquamation in the second week.
The most serious sequelae is coronary artery aneurysm, affecting 20% to 25% of untreated patients and
19% of treated patients in the UK, with even higher coronary artery aneurysm complication rates in those
ages under 1 year.
Current standard treatment includes intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), alongside aspirin. There remains
clinical equipoise if up-front corticosteroids reduce coronary artery aneurysms in unselected cases, but they
are usually added for high-risk cases as well as patients with Kawasaki shock syndrome.
In IVIG-resistant cases, other medications which may be of benefit include high-dose pulsed intravenous
methylprednisolone, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibitors (e.g., infliximab), interleukin (IL)-1 inhibitors,
(e.g., anakinra), or cyclosporine.
Definition
Kawasaki disease (KD) is an acute, febrile, self-limiting, systemic vasculitis, the exact etiology of which is not
fully understood that almost exclusively affects young children. In an immunogenetically predisposed host, an
environmental trigger, including infectious agents, results in an aberrant inflammatory host response leading
to the clinical manifestations. Clinically, it is characterized by fever, polymorphic rash, conjunctivitis, mucosal
erythema with strawberry tongue, erythema and swelling of the hands and feet, and unilateral cervical
lymphadenopathy. The most serious complication is the development of coronary artery aneurysms, which
account for significant morbidity and mortality and affect 20% to 25% of untreated patients. KD is the leading
cause of acquired heart disease in children ages under 5 years in the US and other developed countries.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Kawasaki disease Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
Kawasaki disease (KD) almost exclusively affects young children, with peak incidence between the ages
of 13-24 months.[2] It is rare in the first 6 months of life, and 80% of all cases occur before the age of 5
years.[3] It affects approximately 5000 US children annually with an incidence in the US of 24.7 per 100,000
children ages <5 years in 2010, based on hospitalization data.[4] The incidence in the UK is 4.5 per 100,000
children ages <5 years.[5]
Although KD has been described in all ethnicities throughout the world.[6] The incidence is highest in
patients from Northeast Asia, especially Japan and Korea, suggesting a significant role for host genetics
in pathogenesis. In the US, children of Asian/Pacific origin have the highest KD rate (50.4 per 100,000),
followed by children of black (29.8) and white (22.5) origins.[4] An earlier report from 1997-2000 showed an
annual incidence of 16.9, 11.1, and 9.1 in 100,000 in the US for black, Hispanic, and white children ages <5
years, respectively.[7] However, the annual incidence of KD among American Indians and Alaskan native
children ages <5 years in 1999 was found to be only 4.3 in 100,000, despite the Asian ancestral origin of
these children.[8] The figures for children of Asian-American and Pacific Island origin are reported to be
higher, at 32.5 in 100,000.[7]
The annual incidence in Japan was estimated in 1999 as 75-125 cases in 100,000 in children ages <5
years.[9] However, a more recent study showed that children of Japanese ancestry have a much higher
incidence of 243.1 to 264.8 per 100,000.[4] [10] The recurrence rate in Japanese children is 3%.[4]
Japanese KD surveillance studies have shown the incidence of KD is increasing relative to the decreasing
birth rate.[11]
There is increasing awareness of the long-term morbidity and mortality associated with coronary artery
aneurysm development; with a lifelong risk of coronary artery thrombosis, rupture, and myocardial
infarction.[12]
Untreated, the incidence of coronary artery aneurysm is thought to be between 20% to 25%. The British
Paediatric Surveillance Unit survey reports 19% of treated patients in the UK with KD still developed
coronary artery aneurysms increasing to 39% in those ages under 1 year despite intravenous immune
globulin.[5]
Etiology
The etiology of Kawasaki disease (KD) remains unknown. However, the following observations suggest that
this disease is triggered by an unknown infectious agent in a susceptible host.
• Seasonal variation: variation in incidence associated with different seasons with peaks noted in Japan
and the US in the winter and spring.[11]
• Geographical distribution: temporal clusters have been reported in the US, Japan, and worldwide.[3]
Moreover, in Japan, hot spots of increased incidence have been noted to cluster in certain geographic
areas.[13]
• Age at onset: peak incidence is in early childhood, with 80% cases in infants ages <5 years. The rarity
of cases in infants ages <3 months may suggest protective transplacental antibodies.[3] [9]
To date, no infectious trigger has been identified for KD with studies specifically failing to find any link with
parvovirus B19, retrovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes, measles, or human coronavirus (NL-63).[14]
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Kawasaki disease Theory
Similar phenotypes of toxin-mediated diseases (including staphylococcal and streptococcal toxic shock
syndrome [TSS] and scarlet fever), with fever, mucosal membrane involvement and desquamating skin
rash, have also led to certain bacteria being considered as putative triggers for KD. Moreover, TSS toxin-
secreting  Staphylococcus aureus  isolated from a patient with KD, manifested with coronary aneurysm,
has been reported.[15] It is speculated that a trigger, potentially an infection, results in an immune-mediated
reaction, leading to disease manifestation in an immunogenetically susceptible host. It has been proposed
that, in both KD and TSS, the disease is caused by viral or bacterial toxins acting as superantigens.[16] [17]
A superantigen theory for KD continues to be investigated; however, significant supportive data are currently
lacking.[18]
The genetics of KD are complex and it is likely that multiple polymorphisms contribute to the pathogenesis.
Genetics are thought to play an important role given the increased incidence of KD in Asian populations
in the US and other geographic areas. In addition, there is familial aggregation with increased incidence in
parents and siblings of affected children.[11] In the largest KD genome-wide association study in Japan, the
most significantly associated genetic susceptibilities were variants associated with high affinity of FC receptor
for immune globulin G (FCGR2A) and variants related to the T-cell receptor region regulator known as ITPKC
(inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate 3-kinase C).[19] [20] Variants in the latter are associated with coronary artery
aneurysm developement and intravenous immune globulin resistance.[19]
One 2017 meta-analysis of genetic association studies found 23 gene polymorphisms to be associated
with KD susceptibility, and 10 that may be associated with coronary artery lesions. Many of these genes
are lymphocyte activators or inhibitors with others involved in cytokine, chemokine, and adhesion molecule
function, or vascular remodelling.[21]
Although similarities exist between KD and acrodynia (mercury hypersensitivity), studies to link KD to drugs,
toxins, chemicals, and heavy metals have shown negative results.[22]
Pathophysiology
Initially, KD was considered a self-limiting, benign condition, however, it is now known that 20% to 25% of
untreated patients develop coronary artery aneurysms, and there is an up to 2% mortality rate associated
with coronary artery aneurysms. In addition, KD has been reported to be associated with myocardial
infarction, sudden death, and ischemic heart disease.[23]
In the early phase of the disease, there is development of edema and neutrophil infiltration in the coronary
arterial wall, with a rapid transition to mononuclear cells.[24] This is followed by local production of matrix
metalloproteinases that cause destruction of the internal elastic lamina and media. Intimal myofibroblastic
proliferation causes fibrous connective tissue replacement of the intima and media, leading to aneurysm
formation, scarring, and stenosis.[25] Fibrotic changes have been identified of the myocardium, emphasizing
that the cardiac inflammation may be more widespread than initially considered, and not restricted to the
coronary arteries.[12]
Arterial remodelling, a process which can take place over years, can lead to stenoses, particular at the
interface between the normal artery and the aneurysm. Larger aneurysms are more likely to persist and are
associated with an increased risk of thrombotic coronary occlusion, stenoses and myocardial infarction.
Reports are available from children with KD who did not develop coronary abnormalities during the
acute phase of the disease and died years later due to unrelated causes. Autopsies performed on these
children demonstrated coronary artery intimal thickening and medial fibrosis.[26] It is uncertain if such
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Kawasaki disease Theory
THEORY
cases represent late sequelae of missed aneurysms following the acute presentation; or more worryingly
an emergence of late KD coronary artery vasculopathy independent of the presence of coronary artery
aneurysms following the acute disease.
Classification
Clinical stages[1]
Clinically, the course of untreated KD is divided into the following stages:
• Acute febrile stage (lasting weeks 1-2)
• Fever, irritability, cervical adenitis, conjunctivitis, rash, mucosal erythema, painful erythema of
the hands and feet, arthralgia or arthritis, possible myocarditis, and pericarditis.
• Subacute stage (lasting weeks 2-4)
• Fever, rash, and lymphadenopathy have resolved; if fever persists there is an increased
risk of cardiac complications; persistent irritability, poor appetite, and conjunctival injection;
desquamation of extremities begins at this stage.
• The patient may be completely asymptomatic if given intravenous immune globulin (IVIG).
Periungual desquamation may be the only apparent clinical manifestation.
• Cardiac abnormalities (coronary artery ectasia or aneurysms) may develop during this stage,
and rarely, later in patients treated with IVIG.
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Kawasaki disease Theory
Coronary artery ectasia
BMJ Case Reports 2009; doi:10.1136/bcr.10.2008.1113
• Convalescent (lasting weeks 4-8)
• All signs of inflammation have receded, and acute phase markers normalize.
• If present, coronary artery ectasia or aneurysms may persist and enlarge.
• Chronic stage (variable)
• If present, coronary artery dilation may resolve.
• However, coronary artery aneurysms may persist through adulthood. Such patients are at risk of
subsequent coronary artery thrombosis, rupture, and myocardial infarction.
Case history
Case history #1
A previously healthy 1-year-old girl was admitted to a children's hospital with a 7-day history of spiking
fever up to 103°F (39.5°C). Three days after the onset of fever she developed left-sided neck swelling
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Kawasaki disease Theory
THEORY
and diaper rash, and became progressively fussy and irritable. She was seen at an emergency
department, diagnosed with cervical adenitis, and sent home on oral antibiotics. The mother noted
continued irritability, high fever, and decreased oral intake. On subsequent admission she was extremely
irritable, with a temperature of 102°F (38.9°C), heart rate of 140 beats per minute, respiratory rate
of 40 breaths per minute, and blood pressure 110/54 mmHg. There were no signs of nuchal rigidity.
Both palpebral and bulbar conjunctivae were deep red and injected, lips were dry and crusted, the
oropharynx hyperemic with some areas of ulcerated mucosa, and the tongue papillae were enlarged
and red (strawberry appearance). Examination of the neck revealed a mildly tender left unilateral mass,
measuring 4 cm. The skin showed a generalized polymorphous, erythematous, macular, blanching rash,
in addition to a severely red and desquamated perineal region. Her extremities, especially palms and
soles, were swollen, red, and mildly tender.
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
Approach
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and symptoms. There are no unique laboratory diagnostic tests for the
disease. The principal signs were recognized and reported in 1974, and these criteria have been updated by
the American Heart Association and endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics.[1] [29]
The Single Hub and Access point for paediatric Rheumatology in Europe (SHARE) guidelines recommend
consideration of the diagnosis of Kawasaki disease (KD) in any child with a febrile, exanthematous illness,
with systemic inflammation, especially if fever persists for longer than 4 days.[30] 
Acute stage
The acute stage generally lasts 7-11 days.
In addition to fever, patients must have four more of the following five signs and symptoms:
• Polymorphous erythematous rash
• Nonpurulent bilateral conjunctival injection (occurs in 90%)
• Oropharyngeal changes, including diffuse hyperemia, strawberry tongue, and lip changes (e.g.,
swelling, fissuring, erythema, and bleeding)
• Peripheral extremity changes, including erythema, edema, induration, and desquamation, which
may cause difficulty walking
• Nonpurulent cervical lymphadenopathy. This occurs in 40% of cases (although other reports
are 50% to 75%) and is generally a single, enlarged, nonsuppurative cervical node measuring
approximately ≥1.5 cm.
These criteria are only guidelines in order to prevent misdiagnosis or over-diagnosis. According to these
guidelines, a diagnosis can be made on day 4 of the fever if four principal criteria are met, especially
when redness and swelling of the hands and feet are present. Experienced clinicians who have treated
many KD patients, in rare instances, may establish diagnosis on day 3 of the fever in the presence of a
classic clinical presentation.[1] The fever must be high; usually greater than 102°F (39°C), but is often
over 104°F (39.9°C). Patients are often irritable beyond that expected for the extent of fever.
The European SHARE recommends that a diagnosis can be reached before 5 days of fever if four
principal criteria are met or if there is evidence of coronary artery dilation (Z score >2 but <2.5) or
aneurysm (Z score ≥2.5) or if there is evidence of persistent inflammation, with no alternative diagnosis,
and a clinical suspicion of KD.[31]
The diagnosis of incomplete KD can be made according to the American Heart Association (AHA)
2017 guidelines in a child with 5 or more days of fever and two or three clinical criteria or in infants
with ≥7 days of fever without alternative diagnosis.[1] The SHARE guidelines highlight that this is a
pragmatic approach to this situation but lacks an evidence base and studies validating criteria for
incomplete KD is an important research priority.[31] Echocardiography in this scenario showing coronary
vasculitis would confirm the diagnosis, but a normal echocardiogram does not exclude the diagnosis.
Moreover, incomplete KD occurs most commonly in infants who are at risk of developing coronary artery
abnormalities and who may have prolonged fever as the only clinical finding. In patients with suspected
KD, the presence of irritability or erythema and/or induration at the site of previous BCG vaccination are
signs that increase the likelihood of diagnosis.[31]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
SHARE recommendations for the management of suspected incomplete Kawasaki disease
de Graeff N, Groot N, Ozen S, et al. European consensus-based recommendations for the diagnosis
and treatment of Kawasaki disease - the SHARE initiative. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2019;58(4):672-682.
Although not part of the formal diagnostic criteria, the 2017 AHA guidelines emphasize the use of
coronary artery measurement Z scores, which reflect standardized dimensions normalized for body
surface area (BSA) and allow for classification and comparisons across time and populations.[1] [32]
Echocardiography is considered positive for coronary abnormalities if any of the following conditions are
met:[1]
• Left anterior descending coronary artery or right coronary artery Z score ≥2.5
• Coronary artery aneurysm seen
• Three or more other suggestive features, including decreased left ventricular function, mitral
regurgitation, pericardial effusion, or Z scores in left anterior descending coronary artery or right
coronary artery of 2.0 to 2.5.
In addition, the presence of three or more of the following laboratory features may increase the index of
suspicion for KD: 1) anemia; 2) platelet count of >450,000 after day 7 of fever; 3) albumin <3.0 g/dL; 4)
elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT); 5) white blood cell (WBC) count >15,000; 6) urine with >10
WBC/high power field.[1]
In the absence of a diagnostic test, these criteria become pivotal in diagnosing a patient with KD. Some
laboratory tests may be supportive, such as acute phase reactants, including erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP). These are significantly elevated (to a greater degree than
expected for common viral infections).[33]
Uncommon findings on physical examination in acute stage
Less common findings may include: stiff neck secondary to aseptic meningitis, facial palsy, anterior
uveitis (70%), pleural effusion, pulmonary infiltrates, pericardial effusion with or without myocarditis, and
congestive heart failure.
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
Others findings include abdominal pain, vomiting, pseudo-obstruction, diarrhea, hepatitis, obstructive
jaundice, gallbladder distension or hydrops of the gallbladder, pancreatitis, joint involvement (arthralgias
or arthritis), meatitis, vulvitis, urethritis with sterile pyuria, proteinuria, nephritis, and acute renal failure. In
addition, peripheral extremity gangrene, pustules, erythema multiforme-like lesions, perineal erythema
(50% to 70%), macules, papules, measles-like rash, and scarlet fever-like erythema may be found.
Subacute stage
This stage lasts between 2-3 weeks, during which the presenting signs and symptoms are in the process
of resolving, including among others, the persistent irritability and reduced appetite. Conjunctival injection
and cracking of the lips may persist in this phase.
Typically features during this phase of illness include peripheral desquamation, improving acute phase
biomarkers, development of thrombocytosis, coronary artery aneurysm development and reduced
temperature.
Convalescent/chronic stage
This stage lasts between 4-6 weeks; the key signs and symptoms have resolved and inflammatory
markers normalized. However, in patients who have developed cardiac sequelae, coronary artery
aneurysms can persist and worsen, and life-threatening complications can develop including thrombosis
or myocardial infarction. 60% of small aneurysms will resolve.
Risk stratification in the long term
In the longer term, risk stratification is based primarily on maximal coronary artery luminal dimensions,
normalized as Z scores, and takes into account both past and current coronary involvement.
• No involvement: always <2
• Dilation only: 2.0 to <2.5; or if initially <2, a decrease in Z score during follow-up ≥1
• Small aneurysm: ≥2.5 to <5.0
• Medium aneurysm: ≥5 to <10, and absolute dimension <8 mm
• Large or giant aneurysm: ≥10, or absolute dimension ≥8 mm.
Additional clinical features indicating risk of myocardial ischemia include greater total number, length,
number of branches, and distal location of aneurysms; structural and functional vessel wall abnormalities;
poor collateral vessels; previous revascularization, coronary artery thrombosis, or myocardial infarction;
and ventricular dysfunction.[1]
Initial investigations
The European SHARE guidelines recommend the following lab tests that should be monitored in all
patients: erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), complete blood count, liver
function tests, serum albumin, serum sodium (for hyoponatremia associated with severe disease),
renal function and urinalysis. Ferritin and fibrinogen should also be monitored if macrophage activation
syndrome is suspected. Notably, ESR is not a particularly useful test after intravenous immune globulin
treatment as it may become elevated due to binding of immune globin to red blood cells.[1] [31]
During the acute stage, many acute-phase reactant markers such as ESR, CRP, and serum ferritin
are significantly elevated. These tests tend to return to normal levels at the end of the subacute phase
toward the convalescent phase, with CRP returning to normal values more rapidly than ESR. If ESR
and CRP were normal or very mildly elevated (ESR <40 mm/hour and/or CRP <2 mg/dL) at the onset of
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
the acute stage, this would be atypical of KD and alternative diagnoses should be considered including
streptococcal infections (especially scarlet fever), and viral illnesses, with infectious disease consultation if
necessary. Mild to moderate normochromic anemia is observed in the acute stage, along with an elevated
level of white blood cell count. During the subacute stage, thrombocytosis is typical with platelet count
increasing during the second week and continuing for the third week, usually with platelet counts of up to
1 million/microliter, but counts as high as 2 million/microliter are occasionally observed.
The European SHARE guidelines recommend an ECG and echocardiogram at 6-8 weeks after disease
onset and at least weekly in patients with confirmed coronary abnormalities or ongoing inflammation.[31]
The 2017 AHA guidelines recommend that patients with coronary artery abnormalities (Z score >2.5)
during the acute illness should have more frequent echocardiography (at least twice weekly) until
dimensions cease, progressing to monitor risk of and presence of thrombus.[1] The SHARE guidelines
recommend that patients with a normal initial echocardiogram in whom the acute illness has subsided
should have a repeat echocardiogram at 2 weeks after initiation of treatment.[31]The 2017 AHA
guidelines similarly recommends an echocardiogram at 1-2 weeks and 4-6 weeks for these patients in
whom the initial echocardiogram was normal.[1]
These recommendations have been made to assess for possible expansion of aneurysms due to the
associated thrombosis risk and consequent morbidity and mortality risk. Perform echocardiography for
patients with expanding large or giant aneurysms twice per week while dimensions are expanding rapidly,
at least once weekly in the first 45 days of illness, and then monthly until the third month after illness
onset.[1]
Be aware that in the first week of illness, the echocardiogram is typically normal and does not rule out the
diagnosis.[1] If the echocardiographic findings are abnormal at any stage in the course of the illness, refer
the patient to a pediatric cardiologist for a complete cardiac workup and follow-up care.
Other investigations
Additional tests are performed to exclude or identify other organ system involvement:
• Liver function tests: should be done routinely in all patients with suspected KD to assess for
hepatitis. Transaminitis is a common finding in KD. The patient may have abdominal pain, jaundice,
and nausea and/or vomiting in addition to high fever.
• Urinalysis: should be done routinely in all patients with suspected KD; it will show a mild to
moderate sterile pyuria of urethral origin in 50% of patients. If urinalysis is abnormal, a culture
should be performed to rule out a urinary tract infection.
• Chest x-ray: performed if pericarditis or pneumonitis suspected.
• Electrocardiogram: to exclude conduction abnormalities.
• Ultrasonography of the gallbladder: to exclude hydrops of the gallbladder (if suspected).
• Ultrasonography of the testes: to exclude epididymitis (if suspected).
• Lumbar puncture: performed if patients present with nuchal rigidity and high fever. This test is
necessary to exclude meningitis.
Emerging tests
Magnetic resonance angiography and cardiac catheterization with angiography may be recommended to
further assess coronary aneurysms, and are superior to echocardiography, although may be challenging
to perform in young children <15 kg in weight, where computed tomographic angiography may be
preferred. These imaging modalities are usually recommended by cardiology, especially in the context
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
of unclear findings on echocardiography or in the presence of giant aneurysms. These tests are the
responsibility of the cardiologist and would be ordered when the echocardiogram findings are not clear
or when the echocardiogram shows giant aneurysms and need for more detailed anatomic delineation.
Circulating N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) has been proposed as a potential
diagnostic biomarker for KD. One meta-analysis reviewing the diagnostic utility of NT-proBNP showed
that although it has moderate efficacy for diagnosing KD, in isolation, it was not helpful in confirming or
refuting the diagnosis.[34]
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
polymorphous rash (common)
• Nonspecific polymorphic rash. This is usually a diffuse, maculopapular erythematous rash.
Occasionally scarlatiniform- or erythema multiforme-type rash with target lesions on the arm and trunk.
• Groin erythema or desquamation and fine pustules over extensor surfaces of extremities can occur.
conjunctival injection (common)
• The patient has a history or presents with nonpurulent nonexudative bilateral conjunctival injection (in
90% of cases).
• Less common are episcleritis or uveitis (anterior and/or posterior).
mucositis (common)
• History or physical findings of dry, erythematous, fissured lips that bleed easily, erythema of the oral
and pharyngeal mucosa, and strawberry tongue with prominent papillae and erythema (alone or in
combination in 90% of cases). Oral exudation or Koplik spots are not present and oral ulceration would
be atypical. Strawberry tongue may be present, but oropharyngeal/mucosal changes may be variable.
skin changes in the peripheral extremities (common)
• Initial erythema and edema may be present, usually of palms and soles. Typically the skin on wrists
and ankles would not be involved. Peripheral changes may be acute (swelling and erythema) as well
as subacute (desquamation).
• Periungual desquamation of fingers and toes about 2 weeks after onset may be seen, as may
transverse grooves across the nails (Beau lines) 1 to 2 months after onset.
enlarged cervical lymph nodes (common)
• Unilateral lymphadenopathy is observed in approximately 40% of patients, with node diameter above
1.5 cm.
• The overlying skin may be erythematous. The node is not fluctuant or purulent and is unresponsive to
antibiotics.
coronary artery aneurysms (common)
• Coronary artery abnormalities (mainly aneurysms) develop in approximately 20% to 25% of untreated
patients.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
fever and extreme irritability (common)
• Fever usually over 102°F (39°C). Most patients present because of prolonged fever of at least 5 days
in duration with often abrupt onset. Fever is unresponsive to antibiotics, if given. Patients are often
irritable beyond that expected for the extent of fever.
• There is an associated significant irritability. During this acute phase, many patients will develop poor
intake, abdominal pain, nausea, and diarrhea.
Other diagnostic factors
pericarditis with effusion (uncommon)
• Not part of the diagnostic criteria.
congestive heart failure (uncommon)
• Not part of the diagnostic criteria.
joint pain or edema (uncommon)
• Arthralgia and arthritis involving multiple joints (e.g., including hands, knees, ankles, and hips) are
more common if intravenous immune globulin treatment is delayed.
neurologic manifestations (uncommon)
• Headaches and stiff neck (secondary to aseptic meningitis), facial palsy, and cerebral infarction are
rare, but can occur.
gastrointestinal manifestations (uncommon)
• Abdominal pain, vomiting, pseudo-obstruction, diarrhea, hepatitis, obstructive jaundice, gallbladder
distension or hydrops of the gallbladder, and pancreatitis are rare clinical findings. Gastrointestinal
symptoms may precede typical Kawasaki disease symptoms.[35]
urologic manifestations (uncommon)
• Sterile pyuria is the most common, but meatitis, urethritis and vulvitis (in females), proteinuria,
nephritis, and acute renal failure can occur.
other dermatologic manifestations (uncommon)
• Peripheral extremity gangrene, pustules, erythema multiforme-like lesions, perianal desquamation,
macules, papules, measles-like rash, and scarlet-fever-like erythema are rare clinical findings.
Risk factors
Strong
Asian ancestry
• KD is most common in Asian children, especially those of Japanese descent.
• Some cases of KD show familial susceptibility. Children in Japan who have parents with KD seem to
have a more severe form of this disease and are more susceptible to recurrence.
• KD likely has a genetic susceptibility. Genome-wide multipoint linkage analysis of affected sibling pairs
in Japan identified evidence of linkage at chromosome 12q24.[27]
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
age 3 months to 4 years
• Most patients (80%) with KD are ages <5 years.[1] [3] It is rare in infants ages <3 months and has
been rarely described in adolescents and adults. 
• In the US, the peak age of onset is 13-24 months. In Japan, the peak age of onset is 6-11 months.[13]
Weak
male sex
• Disease occurs more often in males than in females (1.5:1).[3] [28]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Investigations
1st test to order
Test Result
CBC
• In the acute stage, a mild to moderate normochromic anemia is
observed, along with an elevated white blood cell count with left shift.
• During the subacute stage, thrombocytosis is often observed.
anemia, leukocytosis, and
thrombocytosis
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
• During the acute stage, many acute phase reactant markers, such as
ESR, CRP, and serum ferritin, are significantly elevated. ESR tends
to return to normal levels at the end of the subacute phase toward the
convalescent phase.[36]
elevated, but should not
be used to determine
response; intravenous
immune globulin (IVIG)
has been shown to
increase ESR levels
CRP
• During the acute stage, many acute phase reactant markers, such
as erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP, and serum ferritin, are
significantly elevated. CRP levels normalize quicker than other
biomarkers. CRP is used to guide management decisions.
elevated
echocardiogram
• Echocardiography is crucial in management of KD to identify
coronary artery abnormalities. During the acute stage, a baseline
echocardiogram is important to rule these out and seek evidence
of myocarditis, valvulitis, or pericardial effusion. Diffuse dilation of
coronary lumina can be observed in 50% of untreated patients by the
tenth day of illness.
• Perform echocardiography at diagnosis and routinely repeat it at 1-2
weeks and 4-6 weeks after treatment. If coronary artery abnormalities
are significant (Z score >2.5) during the acute illness, perform
echocardiography at least twice per week until luminal dimensions
have stopped progressing.[1] It is important to detect coronary artery
thrombosis because failure to prescribe timely thromboprophylaxis
with the rapid expansion of aneurysms is a cause of morbidity and
mortality.[1] Perform echocardiography for patients with expanding
large or giant aneurysms twice per week while dimensions are
expanding rapidly, at least once weekly in the first 45 days of illness,
and then monthly until the third month after illness onset.[1]
• Be aware that in the first week of illness the echocardiogram is
typically normal and does not rule out the diagnosis.[1]
• For children with suspected incomplete KD and fever, obtaining
an echocardiogram with coronary artery measurements without
delay is strongly recommended by the American College of
Rheumatology.[37]
signs of coronary
abnormalities during
acute stage: left anterior
descending coronary
artery or right coronary
artery Z score ≥2.5;
coronary artery aneurysm
seen; three or more other
suggestive features,
including decreased left
ventricular function,
mitral regurgitation,
pericardial effusion, or
Z scores in left anterior
descending coronary
artery or right coronary
artery of 2.0 to 2.5
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
Other tests to consider
Test Result
serum LFTs
• Icteric and anicteric hepatitis can develop, with mild elevations in
aminotransferase values observed in 40% of patients.
• Elevated alanine aminotransferase levels can indicate a more serious
course.
• Bilirubin levels are elevated in 10% of patients.
elevated liver enzymes;
low level of albumin
urinalysis
• Will show a mild to moderate sterile pyuria of urethral origin in 50% of
patients.
• If urinalysis is abnormal, a culture should be performed to rule out a
urinary tract infection.
sterile pyuria
chest x-ray
• Looks for cardiomegaly in the case of pericarditis, myocarditis, or
subclinical pneumonitis.
• Should be performed to assess baseline findings and to confirm any
clinical suspicion of congestive heart failure.
cardiomegaly or, more
rarely, pneumonitis
electrocardiogram
• Needs to be obtained to evaluate for various conduction
abnormalities. Children with KD may also have acute infarction.
• Tachycardia, a prolonged PR interval, ST-T wave changes, and a
decreased voltage of R waves may indicate myocarditis. Q-wave or
ST-T-wave changes may indicate a myocardial infarction.
conduction abnormalities
and/or myocardial
infarction
ultrasonography of the gallbladder
• May be necessary if liver or gallbladder dysfunction is suspected.
hydrops of the gallbladder
in some patients
ultrasonography of the testes
• In case of testicular involvement in males, a scrotal sonogram to
evaluate for epididymitis should be performed. Epididymitis is an
inflammatory process that can occur in various vasculitides and
affects boys aged 9 to 14 years. It can be observed in younger boys
with Henoch-Schonlein purpura and KD.
epididymitis in
males with testicular
involvement
lumbar puncture
• May be needed in patients who present with high fever and nuchal
rigidity.
• Some patients with KD may have aseptic meningitis.
• Aseptic meningitis could be one of the adverse effects of intravenous
immune globulin treatment.
aseptic meningitis in
some patients
magnetic resonance angiography
• Free-breathing 3-dimensional coronary magnetic resonance
angiography may accurately define coronary artery aneurysms
in patients with KD. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance is useful
for demonstrating coronary artery aneurysms and other coronary
pathology.[38]
coronary dilations or
aneurysms
cardiac catheterization and angiography
• A subset of patients with KD, especially those with findings of
large or giant coronary artery aneurysms (>8 mm in diameter),
may require cardiac catheterization and angiography to further
characterize these abnormalities, although care should be taken
coronary artery
aneurysms
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
when considering invasive arteriography in the presence of ongoing
systemic inflammation since complication rates (such as catheter-
related myocardial infarction) may be higher.
natriuretic peptide tests
• Elevated N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) may be
present in KD.[34] However, these do not automatically confirm the
diagnosis as they may be associated with a wide variety of cardiac
and noncardiac causes.
elevated levels of
natriuretic peptides
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Staphylococcal or
streptococcal infection
• A positive response to
antibiotics; visible skin
lesions; purulent tonsils;
burns, and signs of
pneumonia or septic arthritis.
• Positive blood culture, throat
swab, and skin swab.
• Ultrasound of a single
lymph node shows that
bacterial lymphadenitis is
most commonly associated
with a single node with a
hypoechoic core.[1]
Systemic juvenile
idiopathic arthritis
(systemic JIA)
• Typically presents with fever,
rash, and lymphadenopathy.
Some patients have arthritis
at disease onset, with
others developing this
during their disease course.
Serositis (pericardial
effusion or pleural effusion),
hepatosplenomegaly and
deranged coagulation
can occur. Complicating
macrophage activation
syndrome is common and
is associated with increased
mortality.
• The rash is a fine,
evanescent salmon pink,
usually appears on the trunk,
proximal extremities and,
less commonly, on the face.
The rash accompanies the
spikes of fever and tends to
disappear when the fever is
down.
• These patients do not
develop coronary artery
aneurysms.
• Unlike with other forms of
JIA, patients with systemic
JIA are usually anemic and
have extremely high acute
phase markers (erythrocyte
sedimentation rate and
CRP), as is found in KD.
• Clinical features can
differentiate these
conditions.
Scarlet fever • An acute febrile illness
caused by group A
streptococcus.
• The patients usually have
evidence of upper respiratory
tract infection, mostly
pharyngitis, accompanied
by a diffuse, fine papular
• Positive throat culture, or
positive serologic test for
group A streptococcus
(streptozyme and/or
antistreptolysin O), will
confirm the diagnosis.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
erythematous rash that
appears on the trunk,
extremities, and face, but
with circumoral pallor.
• Resolution of the rash
is associated with
desquamation that starts
in the face and progresses
downward.
• Unlike in KD, in scarlet
fever lips are spared and
there is no conjunctivitis or
conjunctival injection.
Acute rheumatic fever • An acute illness that occurs
3 to 4 weeks following
the onset of group A
streptococcal pharyngitis.
• These patients develop
migratory polyarthritis and
more than 50% develop
carditis.[39]
• Less commonly, the course
may be associated with
chorea, subcutaneous
nodules, and erythema
marginatum.
• There is no development of
coronary artery aneurysms,
but untreated patients will
eventually develop chronic
valvular disease.
• Positive throat culture or
positive serologic test for
group A streptococcus
(streptozyme and/or
antistreptolysin O) will
confirm the diagnosis.
Toxic shock syndrome
(TSS)
• An acute febrile illness that
is associated with vomiting,
diarrhea, myalgia, strawberry
tongue, and erythematous
rash with subsequent
desquamation.
• Many develop acute
respiratory distress,
hypotension, and shock.
• The disease is caused by
staphylococcal or group A
streptococcal infections.
• TSS can follow burns, mild
abrasions, or surgery; or it
may have no obvious focus.
• There is no diagnostic test
for toxic shock syndrome.
The diagnosis is based on
clinical grounds.
• Isolation of staphylococcus
or group A streptococcus
serotypes that produce
TSS-1 toxin will support the
diagnosis.
Staphylococcal scalded
skin syndrome
• Caused by the
staphylococcal epidermolytic
toxins A and B.
• There is a generalized skin
erythema, with development
of diffuse, sterile blisters
and erosions; prominent
• Diagnosis is made on clinical
grounds.
• Identifications of strains 55
and/or 71 of staphylococci in
cultures.
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
circumoral erythema; and
radial crusting and fissuring
around the eyes, mouth, and
nose.
• In addition, areas of
epidermis may separate in
response to gentle force
(Nikolsky sign). These
changes may lead to
secondary infection, sepsis,
and electrolyte imbalance.
Stevens-Johnson
syndrome
• A severe bullous form
of erythema multiforme,
also known as erythema
multiforme major.
• It is characterized by
high fever, pronounced
constitutional symptoms,
skin rash manifested by
diffuse bullae, and mucosal
membrane involvement.
• The severe explosive
mucosal erosions and the
widespread bullous skin
lesions may differentiate this
condition from KD.
• There is no development of
coronary artery aneurysms,
although these patients
may benefit from high-
dose intravenous immune
globulin.
• There is no diagnostic
test for Stevens-Johnson
syndrome. The diagnosis is
on clinical grounds.
Drug reaction • History of exposure to the
drug, presence of oral
lesions or ulcers, periorbital
edema, and low acute
phase markers may help to
distinguish it from KD.
• Diagnosis is made on clinical
grounds, although acute-
phase markers (such as
erythrocyte sedimentation
rate and CRP) in KD are
significantly higher than in an
acute drug reaction.
Rocky Mountain spotted
fever
• A febrile illness caused
by rickettsial infection (
Rickettsia rickettsii ). The
disease is transmitted by a
tick bite and characterized by
fever, headaches, abdominal
pain, vomiting, and diarrhea,
followed by severe myalgias.
• The hallmark of the disease
is the rose-red blanching
macular rash that appears
first on the extremities, but
subsequently spreads to
• Diagnosis is made on
clinical grounds, although
confirmation would be
achieved using indirect
fluorescent antibody
technique for  R rickettsii .
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
involve the entire body,
including palms and soles.
• After several days the
rash becomes petechial or
hemorrhagic, with evidence
of a palpable purpura.
• In fulminant cases,
multiorgan failure may
develop, including
myocarditis and renal or liver
failure.
Measles • Unlike with KD patients,
measles manifestations
include exudative
conjunctivitis, Koplik spots
in mouth, rash that typically
begins behind the ears.
• Diagnosis is made on clinical
grounds, although acute-
phase markers (such as
erythrocyte sedimentation
rate and CRP) in KD are
significantly higher and
confirmation of the viral
disease would be achieved
using antibody titers.
• Measles can be confirmed
by polymerase chain
reaction.
Multisystem inflammatory
syndrome in children
(MIS-C)
• Also known as pediatric
multisystem inflammatory
system (PMIS).
• A rare and severe
inflammatory condition has
been reported following
coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) infection, which
shares some clinical features
with KD including fever,
conjunctival injection, oral
mucosal changes (red/
cracked lips and strawberry
tongue), rash, swollen/red
hands and feet, cervical
lymphadenopathy, and
cardiac sequelae including
coronary artery dilations and
aneurysms.[40]
• MIS-C patients may
have more prominent
gastrointestinal and
neurologic symptoms than
KD patients. They may
also have more frequent
arrhythmias and ventricular
dysfunction and be more
likely to present in shock.
• MIS-C patients typically span
a wider age range than KD
patients. Younger children
• MIS-C is temporally
associated with COVID-19
infection and therefore its
likelihood is informed by
local COVID-19 prevalence
and an epidemiologic link
to COVID-19 in the child,
e.g., positive COVID-19 PCR
or serology test, preceding
COVID-19-like illness, or
close contact with suspected
or confirmed COVID-19 in
the past 4 weeks.
• There may be a higher CRP
in MIS-C, with lower platelet
and lymphocyte counts.[41]
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
present more often with KD-
like symptoms and older
children with myocarditis and
shock. While KD is more
common in children of East
Asian descent, MIS-C has a
higher incidence in children
of African, African-Carribean
and Hispanic descent,
although the reason for this
is currently unclear.[41]
Criteria
American Heart Association (AHA) diagnostic criteria[1]
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and symptoms. There are no unique laboratory diagnostic tests for
the disease. The principal signs were recognized and reported in 1974, and these criteria have been
updated by the AHA (Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease; the Council on
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young) and endorsed by the American Academy of Pediatrics.[1] [29]
Patients with classic KD must have 5 days of fever that is refractory to antibiotic therapy (if given) and 4 of the
following 5 signs and symptoms:
• Bilateral conjunctival injection
• Polymorphous rash
• At least one of the following mucous-membrane changes:
• Injected lips (and/or dryness, fissuring, peeling, cracking, and bleeding of the lips)
• Injected pharynx
• Strawberry tongue (with erythema and prominent fungiform papillae)
• At least one of the following extremity changes:
• Erythema of the palms or soles (painful induration is common)
• Periungual desquamation of the fingers and toes (2-3 weeks following the onset of fever)
• Cervical lymphadenopathy (at least one lymph node >1.5 cm in diameter), usually unilateral
• Risk stratification for relative risk of future myocardial ischemia has also been proposed:[1]
• Low-risk level: patients without detectable CAAs
• Low-moderate-risk level: patients with regressed CAAs
• High-risk level: patients with angiographic evidence of large or giant aneurysms, or coronary
obstruction.
Although not part of the formal diagnostic criteria, the 2017 AHA guidelines emphasized the utility of Z scores
to reflect standardized dimensions of coronary arteries normalized for body surface area (BSA) to allow for
classification and comparisons across time and populations.[32] The guidelines suggest using maximal past
and current Z scores and any other additional clinical features when deciding on risk stratification for long-
term management.[1]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Kawasaki disease Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Z-score classification[1]
1. No involvement: always <2
2. Dilation only: 2.0 to <2.5; or if initially <2, a decrease in Z score during follow-up ≥1
3. Small aneurysm: ≥2.5 to <5.0
4. Medium aneurysm: ≥5 to <10, and absolute dimension <8 mm
5. Large or giant aneurysm: ≥10, or absolute dimension ≥8 mm.
Additional clinical features indicating risk of myocardial ischemia include greater total number, length, number
of branches, and distal location of aneurysms; structural and functional vessel wall abnormalities; poor
collateral vessels; previous revascularization, coronary artery thrombosis, or myocardial infarction; and
ventricular dysfunction.[1]
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Approach
The main goal of treatment is to prevent cardiac complications, especially coronary artery aneurysms, by
treating the inflammatory process as early as possible, in addition to treating the acute illness and reducing
duration of inpatient stay.
Risk factors for complications (coronary aneurysms) include those with severe inflammation (e.g., CRP >100
mg/L), persistent fever despite treatment, or persistently elevated C-reactive protein (CRP).
Presentation ≤10 days from onset or presentation >10 days from
onset with evidence of ongoing inflammation
Standard treatment includes administering a single infusion of intravenous immune globulin (IVIG),
early in the course of the disease within 10 days of the onset.[43] Treatment should be started as
soon as a patient is diagnosed with either complete or incomplete KD.[1] [31] IVIG is also indicated in
patients who present after 10 days with KD, even if fever has resolved. This is considered to be the most
current treatment regimen and has been successful in reducing the duration of fever and the prevalence
of coronary artery aneurysms in KD.[44] Delaying treatment may lead to significant coronary artery
aneurysms.[37] Live immunizations, such as measles, mumps varicella, should be deferred if the patient
has been treated with IVIG due to the risk of suppressing the immune response to the vaccine. For
patients at high risk of exposure to measles, the immunization can be given and repeated at least 11
months after IVIG exposure.[1] [31]
Aspirin should be used with IVIG therapy and is thought to have an additive anti-inflammatory effect at
higher doses, and can help prevent thrombosis via its antiplatelet effect at lower doses.[37] In the US,
the anti-inflammatory dose used tends to be higher than that used in Japan and Europe. The dose of
aspirin used has not been found to affect the incidence of coronary artery aneurysms.[31] Variation
exists among medical centers concerning when aspirin dose should be reduced to antiplatelet levels:
either 48-72 hours after fever resolves, or 14 days after the onset of symptoms and when the patient has
been afebrile for at least 48-72 hours.[33] The European guidelines recommend that the dose should
be reduced 48 hours after fever resolves as long as clinical symptoms are improving and the CRP is
falling.[31] Low-dose aspirin should be continued for 6-8 weeks after the acute episode and can then
be stopped if the echocardiogram remains normal.[1] [31] European guidelines note that patients with
regressed aneurysms may have persistent endothelial function abnormalities and therefore ongoing low-
dose aspirin should be considered depending on individual risk.[31]
One meta-analysis and systematic review reported that prescribing low-dose or no aspirin was associated
with reduced risk of coronary artery aneurysms compared with high-dose aspirin in the acute phase of KD
with IVIG treatment, but results need to be validated in a prospective trial.[45]
Two-thirds of patients will be afebrile and improve within 24 hours of completion of the IVIG infusion, and
90% will be afebrile by 48 hours. This therapy regimen is effective in reducing the prevalence of coronary
artery abnormalities from 20% to 25% down to 2% to 4%.[44]
Some patients may have persistent or recurrent fever 48 hours after a single dose of IVIG infusion. These
patients are at increased risk of developing coronary artery abnormalities and may benefit from a second
IVIG infusion. The American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation recommends that patients
with acute KD and persistent fever after initial treatment with IVIG should receive a second course of
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
IVIG rather than advancing therapy with corticosteroids.[37] However, European guidance recommends
consideration of initiating corticosteroids along with the second dose of IVIG in this situation.
One network meta-analysis found that the combination therapy with the standard therapy of IVIG and
aspirin might have an additional effect on shortening the duration of fever and lowering the coronary
artery aneurysms incidence rate in patients with acute KD. However, the authors caution that new
randomized trials would be required to support the results.[46]
Monitoring response to treatment
Resolution of fever should not be relied upon alone as a marker of treatment success as significant
systemic inflammation may continue despite fever resolution. A practical approach to monitoring response
to treatment has been published in 2022, an approach used by the ongoing Kawasaki Disease Coronary
Artery Aneurysm Prevention trial, an open-label trial investigating if initial treatment with corticosteroids
alongside IVIG and aspirin reduces incidence of coronary artery aneurysms. The therapeutic target in KD
is "zero fever, zero CRP."
In the 48 hours following IVIG, patients should be afebrile and have a normal CRP (<10 mg/L) or CRP
should be at least halving every 24 hours (as the half-life of CRP is 18 hours when hepatic production is
ceased).[47]
Patients refractory to IVIG
Various definitions for refractory Kawasaki have been postulated. The definition used in international
guidelines and clinical trials is failure of resolution of fever within 36-48 hours of initial IVIG. However,
it has been proposed that this definition should be broadened to include evidence of ongoing systemic
inflammation within 48 hours of initial treatment to detect children with ongoing inflammation who are at
risk of developing or worsening cardiac sequelae.[47]
IVIG resistance occurs in 10% to 20% of cases.[48] Patients with IVIG resistance are at a higher risk of
developing coronary artery aneurysms.[31] [49]
Outside of Japan, clinical scores to predict IVIG resistance perform suboptimally.[50] [51] [52] Therefore,
clinicians elsewhere should assess the risk of IVIG resistance based on symptoms and laboratory
values. Factors that increase the risk of IVIG resistance include: age <12 months; low serum sodium,
hemoglobin, or albumin; high alanine transaminase, CRP, or bilirubin; and signs of shock or macrophage
activation syndrome.[31] [51]
A susceptibility gene on chromosome 19 which codes inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate 3-kinase C (ITPKC) has
been shown to be significantly associated with IVIG resistance in KD patients and in those with coronary
artery lesions.[19] [49] It is probable that there are other genetic susceptibility genes which are yet to be
identified.
Corticosteroids
• In Europe, corticosteroids are given as first-line to those with severe disease (high CRP >100
mg/L, persistently elevated CRP despite treatment, anemia, hypoalbuminemia, liver dysfunction,
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis or shock), those with evolving coronary or peripheral
aneurysms at presentation with evidence of ongoing inflammation, and as rescue treatment in
those with IVIG failure (with either ongoing fever, persistent inflammation or ongoing clinical signs
48 hours after IVIG).[47] [31] The European guidelines also recommend that corticosteroids are
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
given to patients with proven IVIG resistance, Kobayashi score of 5 or more (if assessed with this
tool), features of shock or macrophage activation syndrome, ages <1 year, or established presence
of coronary or peripheral aneurysms with ongoing inflammation.[31]
• It has been shown that corticosteroids are beneficial in refractory KD and appear to reduce the
risk of heart problems after Kawasaki disease without causing any important adverse effects.
One 2022 Cochrane Review supports the use of corticosteroids in the acute phase of KD as it
is associated with reduced coronary artery abnormalities, shorter duration of hospital stay and
reduced inflammatory markers when compared to those treated without corticosteroids.[53]
Literature on the use of oral and intravenous pulse corticosteroid therapy in KD has produced
conflicting results due to heterogeneity in the doses, regimens, and patient populations used in
the studies.[54] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] [61] Until more data are available, the subset of patients
with KD that are IVIG-resistant and/or with life-threatening complications should be treated with
corticosteroid therapy.[53] [62]
• The American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation recommends that patients with
acute KD who are at high risk of IVIG resistance or developing coronary artery aneurysms are
given IVIG with adjunctive corticosteroids as initial therapy rather than IVIG monotherapy, with
high-risk defined as a Z score greater than or equal to 2.5 for the left anterior descending coronary
artery or right coronary artery at initial scan and ages <6 months, pending further studies to identify
at risk patients in the US population.[37]
• Further prospective, multicenter, randomized controlled trials are needed to determine the efficacy
of pulsed intravenous or oral doses of corticosteroids in the treatment of IVIG-resistant KD, and
also for unselected cases of KD.
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha antagonists
• The TNF-alpha antagonist infliximab has been used in patients refractory to IVIG and
corticosteroids.[63] Although there have been reports of IVIG resistant cases being treated with
infliximab second-line instead of corticosteroids, the American Heart Association guidelines
recommend corticosteroids as second-line ahead of infliximab due to the stronger evidence
base, with more evidence to support the use of a corticosteroid when compared with the use of
infliximab.[1]
• One 2021 multicenter trial compared a second IVIG dose with infliximab in IVIG resistant
children. Despite shorter duration of fever in the infliximab group there was no difference between
inflammatory markers or rates of coronary artery abnormalities between the groups.[64]
• The American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation recommends that patients with
acute KD who are at high risk of IVIG resistance or developing coronary artery aneurysms are
given IVIG with adjunctive immunomodulatory immunosuppressive agents (e.g., infliximab,
anakinra, or cyclosporine) as initial therapy rather than IVIG monotherapy, if high risk,
if glucocorticoids are contraindicated. However, there is currently stronger evidence for
glucocorticoids in comparison with nonglucocorticoid immunomodulating treatment to be used in
addition to IVIG in high risk patients.[37]
• The European SHARE guidelines also recommend consideration of using TNF-alpha antagonists in
patients with persistent inflammation despite IVIG, aspirin, and corticosteroids.[31]
• One Cochrane review looked at TNF-alpha antagonists used after IVIG or as initial treatment in
five trials including 494 children. Four of the trials used infliximab and one used etanercept. The
authors found low-certainty evidence that TNF-alpha antagonists reduced treatment resistance
and were associated with fewer infusion reactions compared with no treatment or additional IVIG.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
No differences were found in the incidence of coronary artery abnormalities or infections between
groups.[65]
• In one meta-analysis of eight studies of infliximab therapy used after IVIG or as initial treatment,
infliximab significantly reduced treatment resistance when used as initial treatment compared to
IVIG alone, and improved clinical course when used in IVIG resistant patients compared to repeat
IVIG.[66]
• One network meta-analysis comparing different combinations of pharmacologic interventions for
Kawasaki disease found that the combination of medium dose IVIG, aspirin, and infliximab resulted
in the shortest duration of fever and lowest incidence of coronary artery abnormalities in initial
stage of KD. In the refractory phase, IVIG and pulsed-dose corticosteroids and high-dose IVIG
and cyclosporine were the combinations associated with the most rapid resolution of fever and
lowest incidence of coronary artery abnormalities.[46] Heterogeneity of underlying studies may
have introduced bias in these results.
• Two meta-analyses compared IVIG, methylprednisolone, and infliximab in patients with refractory
KD. They included many of the same studies but came to different conclusions. One study reported
that infliximab and methylprednisolone were significantly more effective in resolving fever than a
second dose of IVIG.[67] The other study reported that infliximab was significantly more effective in
resolving fever than both methylprednisolone and a second dose of IVIG.[68] Neither study found
any differences in the rates of coronary artery lesions between treatment groups.
• One systematic review and meta-analysis found that although monoclonal antibodies and
anticytokine biologics were not effective in reducing the frequency of coronary artery abnormalities
in KD patients, the frequency of IVIG resistance may be reduced compared with conventional
monotherapy with IVIG.[69]
Other immunomodulatory drugs or plasma exchange
• Patients with refractory KD in whom a second dose of IVIG, corticosteroids, and infliximab have
failed may receive an alternative immunomodulatory drug. There is no consensus or evidence as
to whether cyclosporine, anakinra, or cyclophosphamide should be used after other treatments fail
and cases should be discussed with a specialist center.
• Very rarely, plasma exchange may be considered in refractory KD patients who have failed
to respond to all of the above regimens.[1] A retrospective study from Japan assessed the
benefit of adding plasma exchange rescue (PER) to KD patients who were IVIG and infliximab
nonresponders. The study showed that the addition of PER resulted in improvement of fever, other
acute symptoms, laboratory data, and coronary outcomes. These results remain uncertain pending
future randomized trials.[70] 
• One network meta-analysis found that the combination therapy with high-dose IVIG and
corticosteroids or cyclosporine may have an additional effect on improving the rate of decline of
fever and lowering the incidence rate of coronary artery abnormalities in children with refractory
KD. However, the authors caution that new randomized trials would be required to support the
results.[46]
• There has been abundant evidence from human patients, genetic studies, and experimental mouse
models that support the involvement of interleukin-1b (IL-1b) in the pathogenesis of KD. Anakinra
is a competitive inhibitor to both IL-1a and IL-1b and acts by blocking the IL-1 binding to the IL-1
receptor. The Kawakinra study, a phase 2 clinical trial, aimed to determine the efficacy, safety and
tolerability of blocking IL-1 signalling in patients with acute KD who are unresponsive to treatment
with IVIG. While this study supported the early use of anakinra in cases refractory to IVIG, the
effect on the KD symptoms and inflammation parameters took an average of 14 days to achieve.
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Ultimately, the study lays down the groundwork for controlled clinical trials to fully further evaluate
the efficacy of anakinra as a first line treatment for KD.[71]
Presentation >10 days from onset without evidence of ongoing
inflammation
Patients with KD that present after day 10 without persistent fever, and when their acute phase markers
(ESR and/or CRP) are normal, are regarded as without risk of developing coronary aneurysms.
If their initial and subsequent echocardiograms are normal, they should be treated with low-dose
aspirin until 6-8 weeks from the onset. If echocardiogram at 8 weeks is normal, low-dose aspirin can be
discontinued.
However, if diagnosed after day 10 with evidence of elevated ESR or CRP and/or coronary abnormalities
on echocardiogram, patients should be treated as detailed above for patients with evidence of ongoing
inflammation.
Long-term management
All patients with current or previous aneurysms following Kawasaki disease require lifelong follow-up
by a cardiology team within a specialist Kawasaki disease service. Their risk of future cardiac events
is proportional to the degree of cardiac pathology remaining after the acute illness has resolved.[12]
European recommendations suggest that ECG and echocardiography should be performed every 3-6
months in children with coronary artery aneurysms, depending on their severity.[31]
The American Heart Association guidelines include a stratification system based on maximum Z-score
(ever measured) and current Z-score (during long-term follow up) to categorize patients by their risk level
for development of myocardial ischemia.[1] Many of the concepts in the recommendations were similar,
but differed in timing. For brevity, any specific differences are noted under each risk stratum separately
below, but the general concepts are:
• Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every visit.
• If a patient cannot tolerate or is resistant to aspirin, use an alternative antiplatelet agent such as
clopidogrel. Dipyridamole is no longer used for thromboprophylaxis.[1]
• Cardiovascular risk factor assessment includes blood pressure, fasting lipid profile, body mass
index, waist circumference, diet, activity, and smoking.
• Restrict high-contact activities in patients on anticoagulation or dual antiplatelet therapy.
Participation in competitive sports or high-intensity activities should be guided by results from
testing for inducible myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
• Follow-up cardiology assessment should include history and physical exam, echocardiography, and
electrocardiography.
• Additional cardiology assessment includes stress echocardiography, stress with magnetic
resonance imaging, stress nuclear medicine, or positron emission tomography to detect inducible
myocardial ischemia.
• Further imaging includes angiography by computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or
invasive angiography.
• Discourage oral contraceptive use in patients who have ever had medium aneurysms, or larger
(Z score ≥5), and who still have small aneurysms (Z score ≥2.5) or larger. Advise that pregnancy
be supervised by a multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist, and that anticoagulants or
antiplatelet therapy may require adjustment during pregnancy or delivery.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
• The use of statin therapy is not yet widespread. For further information, please see the Emerging
treatments section.
No involvement (Z score always <2)
• Give low-dose aspirin after the acute episode, but discontinue aspirin after 4-6 weeks. Discharge
patients from cardiology follow-up at 4-6 weeks after disease onset, although follow-up may be
continued for up to 12 months.
• Assess cardiovascular risks at least once and ideally at least 1 year from the episode of acute
disease.
• Counsel patients about contraception and pregnancy as you would patients without KD.
Dilation only (Z scores ≥2.0 but <2.5, or a decrease in Z score during follow-up ≥1)
• Give low-dose aspirin, but discontinue it 4-6 weeks after the episode of acute disease. Discharge
from cardiology if luminal dimensions have returned to normal by 4-6 weeks after disease onset,
follow-up may be continued for 12 months. If dilation persists at 4-6 weeks after disease onset,
continue follow-up for 12 months. Dilation usually resolves within 1 year but if dilation persists,
consider whether this represents a dominant branch. If it is a dominant branch, you may discharge
the patient, but may also wish to follow up the patient every 2-5 years.
• Assess cardiovascular risks at least once and ideally at least 1 year from the episode of acute
disease.
• Advise patients about contraception and pregnancy as you would advise patients without KD.
Small aneurysms (Z score ≥2.5 to <5.0)
• Current or persistent small aneurysms
• Treat these patients with low-dose aspirin. Follow up at 4-6 weeks after the acute disease
episode, assess after 6 months and 1 year, and follow up every year thereafter.
• Assess cardiovascular risks at least once and ideally at least 1 year from the episode of
acute disease. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile.
• Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia every 2-3 years, if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or has signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction. Consider further
imaging with angiography every 3-5 years.
• Advise patients about contraception and pregnancy as you would patients without KD.
• Regression to normal Z score or dilation only
• Consider treatment with low-dose aspirin, although it is reasonable to discontinue aspirin
after coronary arteries regress to normal. Assess these patients every 1-3 years. There
is no need to perform echocardiography unless there is evidence for inducible myocardial
ischemia, the patient has symptoms suggestive of ischemia, or the patient has signs
suggestive of ventricular dysfunction.
• Assess cardiovascular risks every 2 years. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile.
• Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia every 3-5 years, if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or has signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction. Consider further
imaging with angiography only if there is evidence for inducible myocardial ischemia or
ventricular dysfunction.
• Advise patients about contraception and pregnancy as you would patients without KD.
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Medium aneurysms (Z score ≥5 to <10, with an absolute luminal dimension <8 mm)
• Current or persistent medium aneurysms
• Treat with low-dose aspirin. Consider dual antiplatelet therapy with an additional antiplatelet
agent.
• Patients should be reviewed at 4-6 weeks after the acute disease episode, then assess after
3 months, 6 months, and 1 year, and follow up every 6-12 months thereafter.
• Assess cardiovascular risks at least once and ideally at least 1 year from the episode of
acute disease. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile.
• Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia every 1-3 years, or if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction. Consider further
imaging with angiography every 2-5 years.
• Advise that participation in competitive sports or high-intensity activities should be guided
by results from testing for inducible myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict activities involving a risk of bodily contact, trauma, or injury for patients taking dual
antiplatelet therapy.
• Discourage patients from using oral contraceptives that increase thrombosis risk, and
recommend that pregnancy is supervised by a multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist.
It may be necessary to alter thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy and delivery.
• Regression to small aneurysms
• Treat with low-dose aspirin. Consider dual antiplatelet therapy with an additional antiplatelet
agent. Follow up patients every year.
• Assess cardiovascular risks every year. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile.
• Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia every 2-3 years, if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or has signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction. Consider further
imaging with angiography every 3-5 years.
• Advise that participation in competitive sports or high-intensity activities should be guided
by results from testing for inducible myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict activities involving a risk of bodily contact, trauma, or injury for patients taking dual
antiplatelet therapy.
• Discourage patients from using oral contraceptives that increase thrombosis risk, and
recommend that pregnancy is supervised by a multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist.
It may be necessary to alter thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy and delivery.
• Regression to normal Z score or dilation only
• Treat with low-dose aspirin. Do not use an additional antiplatelet agent unless there is
evidence of inducible myocardial ischemia. Follow up every 1-2 years. Consider not
performing routine 2D echocardiography unless there is evidence of inducible myocardial
ischemia, the patient has symptoms suggestive of ischemia, or the patient has signs
suggestive of ventricular dysfunction.
• Assess cardiovascular risk every 2 years. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile.
• Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia every 2-4 years, if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or has signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction. Further imaging
with angiography may not be needed in the absence of evidence of inducible myocardial
ischemia.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
• Advise that participation in competitive sports or high-intensity activities should be guided by
results from testing for inducible myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
• No restrictions regarding contraception and pregnancy are applicable to this group of
patients.
Large and giant aneurysms (Z score ≥10 or absolute dimension ≥8 mm)
• Current or persistent large and giant aneurysms
• Treat with low-dose aspirin. Use warfarin to achieve a target international normalized ratio
of 2-3, or a low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) to achieve anti-factor Xa levels of 0.5 to
1.0 units/mL. Consider dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and an additional antiplatelet
agent together with warfarin or LMWH for thromboprophylaxis in the setting of very extensive
or distal coronary artery aneurysms, or if there is a history of coronary artery thrombosis.
Consider treatment with a beta-blocker. Assess patients at 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months after
the episode of acute disease in the first year and every 3-6 months thereafter.
• Assess cardiovascular risks every 6-12 months. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile.
• Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia every 6-12 months, if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or has signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction. Consider further
imaging with angiography for diagnostic and prognostic purposes during the first year and
every 1-5 years thereafter.
• Advise that participation in competitive sports or high-intensity activities should be guided
by results from testing for inducible myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict or modify activities involving a risk of bodily contact, trauma, or injury for patients
taking dual antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy.
• Discourage oral contraceptives that increase thrombosis risk, and recommend that
pregnancy is supervised by a multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist. Advise that
thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy and delivery may be altered.
• Regression to medium aneurysms
• Treat with low-dose aspirin. Discontinue anticoagulation (warfarin or LMWH) and substitute
with an additional antiplatelet agent. Consider treatment with a beta-blocker. Assess the
patient every 6-12 months.
• Assess cardiovascular risks every 12 months. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile.
• Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia every 12 months or if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction. Consider further
imaging with angiography every 2-5 years.
• Advise that participation in competitive sports or high-intensity activities should be guided
by results from testing for inducible myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict or modify activities involving a risk of bodily contact, trauma, or injury for patients
taking dual antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy.
• Discourage using oral contraceptives that increase thrombosis risk, and recommend that
pregnancy is supervised by a multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist. Advise that
thromboprophylaxis management during pregnancy and delivery may be altered.
• Regression to small aneurysms
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
• Treat with low-dose aspirin. Consider treatment with a beta-blocker. Assess the patient every
6-12 months.
• Assess cardiovascular risks every 12 months. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile.
• Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia every 1-2 years, if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or has signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction. Consider further
imaging with angiography every 2-5 years.
• Advise that participation in competitive sports or high-intensity activities should be guided
by results from testing for inducible myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict or modify activities involving a risk of bodily contact, trauma, or injury for patients
taking dual antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy.
• Advise patients as per normal about contraception, but recommend that pregnancy is
supervised by a multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist, and that thromboprophylaxis
may be altered during pregnancy and delivery.
• Regression to normal Z score or dilation only
• Treat with low-dose aspirin. Follow up every 1-2 years. Consider not performing routine 2D
echocardiography unless there is evidence of inducible myocardial ischemia, the patient
has symptoms suggestive of ischemia, or the patient has signs suggestive of ventricular
dysfunction.
• Assess cardiovascular risks every 2 years. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid profile.
• Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia every 2-5 years, if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or signs suggestive of ventricular dysfunction. Further imaging
with angiography may not be needed in the absence of evidence of inducible myocardial
ischemia.
• Advise that participation in competitive sports or high-intensity activities should be guided
by results from testing for inducible myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict or modify activities involving a risk of bodily contact, trauma, or injury for patients
taking dual antiplatelet or anticoagulation therapy.
• Advise patients about contraception as per normal, but recommend that pregnancy is
supervised by a multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist, and that thromboprophylaxis
may be altered during pregnancy and delivery.
Similarly the SHARE guidelines recommend a repeat echocardiogram:[31]
• In patients in whom the initial echocardiogram was normal and the systemic inflammatory process
has improved at 2 weeks after initial IVIG
• In all patients with KD at 6-8 weeks
• In those with ongoing active inflammation (symptoms or signs of KD and/or raised inflammatory
markers) at least weekly to monitor for cardiac complications
• In those with abnormalities on initial echocardiogram at least weekly to ensure stabilization
• In those with coronary artery aneurysm 3-6 monthly.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute ( summary )
presentation ≤10 days from onset;
or presentation >10 days from
onset with evidence of ongoing
inflammation
1st intravenous immune globulin (IVIG)
plus high-dose aspirin
adjunct corticosteroid
2nd infliximab
plus high-dose aspirin
3rd other immunomodulatory drug or plasma
exchange
plus high-dose aspirin
presentation >10 days from onset
without evidence of ongoing
inflammation
1st low-dose aspirin
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Ongoing ( summary )
after initial episode: Z score always
<2; no involvement at any time
1st discontinue low-dose aspirin and provide
follow-up + advice
after initial episode: Z score ≥2.0 to
<2.5; dilation only
1st discontinue low-dose aspirin and provide
follow-up + advice
after initial episode: Z score ≥2.5 to
<5.0; small aneurysm
current or persistent 1st antiplatelet agent
plus follow-up + advice
regression to normal Z
score or dilation only
1st follow-up + advice
adjunct antiplatelet agent
after initial episode: Z score ≥5 to <10
(with absolute luminal dimension <8
mm); medium aneurysm
current or persistent 1st antiplatelet agent
plus follow-up + advice
adjunct additional antiplatelet agent
regression to small
aneurysm
1st antiplatelet agent
plus follow-up + advice
adjunct additional antiplatelet agent
regression to normal Z
score or dilation only
1st antiplatelet agent
plus follow-up + advice
adjunct additional antiplatelet agent
after initial episode: Z score ≥10 or
absolute luminal diameter ≥8 mm;
large or giant aneurysm
current or persistent 1st antiplatelet agent
plus anticoagulant
plus follow-up + advice
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing ( summary )
adjunct additional antiplatelet agent
adjunct beta-blocker
regression to medium
aneurysm
1st discontinue anticoagulant and start dual
antiplatelet therapy
plus follow-up + advice
adjunct beta-blocker
regression to small
aneurysm
1st antiplatelet agent
adjunct follow-up + advice
adjunct discontinue dual antiplatelet therapy
adjunct beta-blocker
regression to normal Z
score or dilation only
1st antiplatelet agent
plus follow-up + advice
adjunct intensify or discontinue
thromboprophylaxis
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute
presentation ≤10 days from onset;
or presentation >10 days from
onset with evidence of ongoing
inflammation
1st intravenous immune globulin (IVIG)
Primary options
» immune globulin (human): 2 g/kg
intravenously as a single dose, may repeat
dose 36-48 hours later if patient fails to
defervesce
» The main goal of treatment is to prevent
coronary artery disease and to relieve symptoms
by controlling the inflammatory process. This
is monitored by the defervescence and the
resolution of all acute symptoms.
» IVIG as a single infusion is the standard
treatment and comprises the mainstay of
therapy, and has been successful in reducing the
duration of fever and the prevalence of coronary
artery aneurysms in KD.[37] [44]
» Treatment should be started as soon as a
patient is diagnosed with either complete or
incomplete KD.[1] [31] The best results are
achieved when treatment is instituted within 10
days or even within 7 days.
» It is also indicated in patients who present after
10 days with KD, even if fever has resolved.
» Some patients fail to defervesce within 36-48
hours. These patients are at increased risk of
developing coronary artery abnormalities and
should be given a second dose of IVIG.
» Z scores define coronary artery abnormalities,
but they do not inform acute phase
management. However, risk stratification for
long-term management takes into account both
past (maximal) and current involvement.
» Live immunizations, such as measles, mumps
varicella, should be deferred if the patient
has been treated with IVIG due to the risk
of suppressing the immune response to the
vaccine. For patients at high risk of exposure
to measles, the immunization can be given
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
and repeated at least 11 months after IVIG
exposure.[1] [31]
plus high-dose aspirin
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» aspirin: 80-100 mg/kg/day orally given in
4 divided doses for 24-72 hours after fever
cessation (up to 14 days), followed by 3-5
mg/kg once daily for 6-8 weeks
» Aspirin should be used with IVIG therapy and
is thought to have an additive anti-inflammatory
effect at higher doses, and can help prevent
thrombosis via its antiplatelet effect at lower
doses in KD.[37]
» Aspirin appears to have no effect on the
incidence or the development of coronary artery
aneurysms, whether treatment is initiated before
or after 5 days of therapy.
» The European guidelines recommend that
the dose should be reduced 48 hours after
fever resolves as long as clinical symptoms are
improving and the CRP is falling.[31] Low-dose
aspirin should be continued for 6-8 weeks after
the acute episode and can then be stopped if
the echocardiogram remains normal.[1] [31]
European guidelines note that patients with
regressed aneurysms may have persistent
endothelial function abnormalities and therefore
ongoing low-dose aspirin should be considered
depending on individual risk.[31]
adjunct corticosteroid
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» methylprednisolone: consult specialist for
guidance on dose
OR
» prednisone: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
» Various definitions for refractory Kawasaki
have been postulated. The definition used
in international guidelines and clinical trials
is failure of resolution of fever within 36-48
hours of initial intravenous immune globulin
(IVIG). However, it has been proposed that
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Acute
this definition should be broadened to include
evidence of ongoing systemic inflammation
within 48 hours of initial treatment; to detect
children with ongoing inflammation who are
at risk of developing or worsening cardiac
sequelae.[47] IVIG resistance occurs in 10% to
20% of cases.[48] Patients with IVIG resistance
are at a higher risk of developing coronary artery
aneurysms.[31] [49]
» The American College of Rheumatology/
Vasculitis Foundation recommends that patients
with acute KD who are at high risk of IVIG
resistance or developing coronary artery
aneurysms are given IVIG with adjunctive
corticosteroids as initial therapy rather than IVIG
monotherapy, with high-risk defined as a Z score
≥2.5 for the left anterior descending coronary
artery or right coronary artery at initial scan
and ages <6 months, pending further studies to
identify at risk patients in the US population.[37]
» In Europe, corticosteroids are given as
first-line to those with severe disease (high
CRP >100 mg/L, persistently elevated CRP
despite treatment, anemia, hypoalbuminemia,
liver dysfunction, hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis or shock), those with
evolving coronary or peripheral aneurysms
at presentation with evidence of ongoing
inflammation, and as rescue treatment in
those with IVIG failure (with either ongoing
fever, persistent inflammation or ongoing
clinical signs 48 hours after IVIG).[31] [47]
The European guidelines also recommend
that corticosteroids are given to patients with
proven IVIG resistance, Kobayashi score of 5
or more (if assessed with this tool), features
of shock or macrophage activation syndrome,
ages <1 year, or established presence of
coronary or peripheral aneurysms with ongoing
inflammation.[31]
» Corticosteroids are beneficial in refractory KD
and appear to reduce the risk of heart problems
after Kawasaki disease without causing any
important side effects. One 2022 Cochrane
review supports the use of corticosteroids
in the acute phase of KD as it is associated
with reduced coronary artery abnormalities,
shorter duration of hospital stay and reduced
inflammatory markers when compared to those
treated without corticosteroids.[53]
» Until more data are available, the subset of
patients with KD that are IVIG-resistant and/or
with life-threatening complications should be
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
given the option of corticosteroid therapy.[53]
[62] [72]
» The literature on the use of oral versus
intravenous corticosteroid therapy in KD has
produced conflicting results due to heterogeneity
in the doses, regimens, and patient populations
used in the studies.[54] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59]
[60] [61]
» Doses vary across studies and a specialist
should be consulted on the appropriate dose.
2nd infliximab
Primary options
» infliximab: 5 mg/kg intravenously as a single
dose
» Infliximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody
to tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha. Efficacy
in other inflammatory conditions, including
vasculitis, supports its use in KD.
» It has been used in patients refractory to
intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) and
methylprednisolone.[63] These patients
comprise an extremely small group of less than
1% of the patients with KD.
» A number of clinicians use infliximab as
a second-line option before a corticosteroid
in patients with IVIG resistance. However,
guidelines cite more evidence to support the use
of a corticosteroid when compared with the use
of infliximab.[1]
» A multicenter, randomized, prospective trial
of infliximab compared with a second IVIG
infusion in 24 children with acute KD and IVIG
resistance showed both treatments to be safe
and well-tolerated. The study concluded that
optimal management of patients resistant to IVIG
remains to be determined.[73]
» The European SHARE guidelines also
recommend consideration of using a TNF-alpha
inhibitor in patients with persistent inflammation
despite IVIG, aspirin, and corticosteroids.[31]
plus high-dose aspirin
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» aspirin: 80-100 mg/kg/day orally given in
4 divided doses for 24-72 hours after fever
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Acute
cessation (up to 14 days), followed by 3-5
mg/kg once daily for 6-8 weeks
» Aspirin is thought to have an additive anti-
inflammatory effect at higher doses, and can
help prevent thrombosis via its antiplatelet effect
at lower doses in KD.[37] In the US, the anti-
inflammatory dose used tends to be higher than
that used in Japan and Europe.
» Aspirin appears to have no effect on the
incidence or the development of coronary artery
aneurysms, whether treatment is initiated before
or after 5 days of therapy.
» The European guidelines recommend that
the dose should be reduced 48 hours after
fever resolves as long as clinical symptoms are
improving and the CRP is falling.[31] Low-dose
aspirin should be continued for 6-8 weeks after
the acute episode and can then be stopped if
the echocardiogram remains normal.[1] [31]
European guidelines note that patients with
regressed aneurysms may have persistent
endothelial function abnormalities and therefore
ongoing low-dose aspirin should be considered
depending on individual risk.[31]
3rd other immunomodulatory drug or plasma
exchange
Primary options
» cyclosporine non-modified: consult
specialist for guidance on dose
Secondary options
» anakinra: consult specialist for guidance on
dose
OR
» cyclophosphamide: consult specialist for
guidance on dose
» There is no consensus or evidence
as to whether cyclosporine, anakinra, or
cyclophosphamide should be used after other
treatments fail and cases should be discussed
with a specialist center.
» One network meta-analysis found that the
combination therapy with high-dose IVIG and
corticosteroids or cyclosporine may have an
additional effect on improving the rate of decline
of fever and lowering the incidence rate of
coronary artery abnormalities in children with
refractory KD. However, the authors caution
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
that new randomized trials would be required to
support the results.[46]
» Very rarely, plasma exchange may be
considered.[1] One retrospective study from
Japan assessed the benefit of adding plasma
exchange rescue (PER) to KD patients who
were IVIG and infliximab nonresponders. The
study showed that the addition of PER resulted
in improvement of fever, other acute symptoms,
laboratory data, and coronary outcomes.
These results remain uncertain pending future
randomized trials.[74]
plus high-dose aspirin
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» aspirin: 80-100 mg/kg/day orally given in
4 divided doses for 24-72 hours after fever
cessation (up to 14 days), followed by 3-5
mg/kg once daily for 6-8 weeks
» Aspirin is thought to have an additive anti-
inflammatory effect at higher doses, and can
help prevent thrombosis via its antiplatelet effect
at lower doses in KD.[37] In the US, the anti-
inflammatory dose used tends to be higher than
that used in Japan and Europe .
» Aspirin appears to have no effect on the
incidence or the development of coronary artery
aneurysms, whether treatment is initiated before
or after 5 days of therapy.
» The European guidelines recommend that
the dose should be reduced 48 hours after
fever resolves as long as clinical symptoms are
improving and the CRP is falling.[31] Low-dose
aspirin should be continued for 6-8 weeks after
the acute episode and can then be stopped if
the echocardiogram remains normal.[1] [31]
European guidelines note that patients with
regressed aneurysms may have persistent
endothelial function abnormalities and therefore
ongoing low-dose aspirin should be considered
depending on individual risk.[31]
presentation >10 days from onset
without evidence of ongoing
inflammation
1st low-dose aspirin
Primary options
» aspirin: 3-5 mg/kg/day orally for 6-8 weeks
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Acute
» Patients with KD that present after day 10
without persistent fever, and with normal acute
phase markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate
and/or CRP) and normal initial echocardiogram,
are regarded as without risk of developing
coronary aneurysms.
» These patients should be treated with
low-dose aspirin until 6-8 weeks. Further
continuation of aspirin beyond 8 weeks depends
on the long-term risk of myocardial ischemia:
low, moderate, or high risk.
» Z scores define coronary artery abnormalities,
but they do not inform acute phase
management. However, risk stratification for
long-term management takes into account both
past (maximal) and current involvement.
» Seek expert advice if in doubt about ongoing
inflammation.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
after initial episode: Z score always
<2; no involvement at any time
1st discontinue low-dose aspirin and provide
follow-up + advice
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
» Discontinue aspirin 4-6 weeks after the
acute episode. These patients do not need
antiplatelet therapy (low-dose aspirin) beyond
the recommended 6-8 weeks after onset.
» Carefully assess cardiovascular risk (blood
pressure, fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist
circumference, dietary and activity assessment,
and smoking) and counsel at least once and
preferably after 1 year after the acute illness.
» Further follow-up is not necessary.
» Angiography is not necessary.
» No restriction of physical activity beyond 8
weeks is necessary.
» Standard contraception and pregnancy
counseling are appropriate.[1]
after initial episode: Z score ≥2.0 to
<2.5; dilation only
1st discontinue low-dose aspirin and provide
follow-up + advice
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
» Discontinue aspirin at 4-6 weeks after the
acute episode.
» Discharge from follow-up if luminal dimensions
have returned to normal by 4-6 weeks, but
continue follow-up for 12 months if dilation
persists. Dilation usually resolves within 1 year,
but if dilation persists, consider whether this
represents a dominant branch, in which case
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Ongoing
you may wish to follow up the patient every 2-5
years.
» Assess cardiovascular risks (blood pressure,
fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist circumference,
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking)
at least once and ideally at least 1 year from the
acute episode.[1]
» Angiography is not necessary. No restriction of
physical activity beyond 8 weeks is necessary.
» Standard contraception and pregnancy
counseling are appropriate.[1]
after initial episode: Z score ≥2.5 to
<5.0; small aneurysm
current or persistent 1st antiplatelet agent
Primary options
» aspirin: 3-5 mg/kg/day orally
Secondary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Offer low-dose aspirin to all children with
coronary artery dilation or aneurysm formation
that is greater than mild (coronary artery Z score
>2.5 to 5.0), at least until aneurysm regression is
demonstrated.[75]
» If patients cannot tolerate or are resistant to
aspirin, clopidogrel is an alternative.
plus follow-up + advice
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
» Follow up at 4-6 weeks after the acute
episode, after 6 months, 12 months and
then annually thereafter, with ECG and
echocardiogram.
» Assess cardiovascular risks (blood pressure,
fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist circumference,
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking)
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
at least once and ideally at least 1 year from the
acute episode. Obtain a fasting lipid profile.
» Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia
(stress echocardiography, stress with MRI,
stress nuclear medicine, or PET) every 2-3
years, if the patient has symptoms suggestive of
ischemia or has signs suggestive of ventricular
dysfunction.
» Consider further imaging with angiography, if
ischemia is present, every 3-5 years.
» No restriction of physical activity beyond 8
weeks is necessary.
» Standard contraception and pregnancy
counseling are appropriate.[1]
regression to normal Z
score or dilation only
1st follow-up + advice
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
» Assess every 1-3 years.
» Assess cardiovascular risk (blood pressure,
fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist circumference,
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking)
every 2 years. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid
profile.
» There is no need to perform echocardiography
unless there is evidence for inducible myocardial
ischemia, the patient has symptoms suggestive
of ischemia, or the patient has signs suggestive
of ventricular dysfunction.
» Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia
(stress echocardiography, stress with MRI,
stress nuclear medicine, or PET) every
3-5 years. Consider further imaging with
angiography only if there is evidence for
inducible myocardial ischemia or ventricular
dysfunction.
» Advise patients about contraception and
pregnancy as you would patients without KD.
adjunct antiplatelet agent
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Ongoing
» aspirin: 3-5 mg/kg/day orally
Secondary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
» Consider treating with low-dose aspirin,
although it is reasonable to discontinue aspirin
after coronary arteries regress to normal.
» If the patient cannot tolerate or is resistant to
aspirin, clopidogrel is an alternative.
after initial episode: Z score ≥5 to <10
(with absolute luminal dimension <8
mm); medium aneurysm
current or persistent 1st antiplatelet agent
Primary options
» aspirin: 3-5 mg/kg/day orally
Secondary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Treat with low-dose aspirin. Treatment should
continue at least until aneurysm regression is
demonstrated.
» If the patient cannot tolerate or is resistant to
aspirin, clopidogrel is an alternative.
plus follow-up + advice
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
» See patients at 4-6 weeks after the acute
disease episode, then assess after 3 months,
6 months, and 12 months, and follow up every
6-12 months thereafter.
» Assess cardiovascular risks (blood pressure,
fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist circumference,
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking)
at least once and ideally at least 1 year from the
episode of acute disease. Obtain a follow-up
fasting lipid profile.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
» Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia
(stress echocardiography, stress with MRI,
stress nuclear medicine, or PET) every 1-3
years, or if the patient has symptoms suggestive
of ischemia or signs suggestive of ventricular
dysfunction.
» Consider further imaging with angiography
every 2-5 years.
» Advise that participation in competitive sports
or high-intensity activities should be guided by
results from testing for inducible myocardial
ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict activities involving a risk of bodily
contact, trauma, or injury for patients taking dual
antiplatelet therapy.
» Discourage patients from using oral
contraceptives that increase thrombosis risk, and
recommend that pregnancy is supervised by a
multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist. It
may be necessary to alter thromboprophylaxis
during pregnancy and delivery.
adjunct additional antiplatelet agent
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
Secondary options
» dipyridamole: consult specialist for
guidance on dose
» Consider dual antiplatelet therapy with an
additional antiplatelet agent such as clopidogrel
(if the patient is not already on it). Treatment
should continue at least until aneurysm
regression is demonstrated.
» If the patient is not able to tolerate or is
resistant to aspirin, and is therefore already on
clopidogrel, consider adding dipyridamole as an
alternative. Dipyridamole is no longer generally
used for long-term thromboprophylaxis. It is an
alternative for aspirin in patients who are taking
ibuprofen, resistant or allergic to aspirin, or at
risk of Reye syndrome.[1]
regression to small
aneurysm
1st antiplatelet agent
Primary options
» aspirin: 3-5 mg/kg/day orally
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Ongoing
Secondary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Treat with low-dose aspirin. Treatment should
continue at least until aneurysm regression is
demonstrated.
» If the patient cannot tolerate or is resistant to
aspirin, clopidogrel is an alternative.
plus follow-up + advice
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
» Follow up patients every year.
» Assess cardiovascular risk (blood pressure,
fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist circumference,
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking)
every year. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid
profile.
» Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia
(stress echocardiography, stress with MRI,
stress nuclear medicine, or PET) every 2-3
years, if the patient has symptoms suggestive of
ischemia or has signs suggestive of ventricular
dysfunction.
» Consider further imaging with angiography
every 3-5 years.
» Advise that participation in competitive sports
or high-intensity activities should be guided by
results from testing for inducible myocardial
ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict activities involving a risk of bodily
contact, trauma, or injury for patients taking dual
antiplatelet therapy.
» Discourage patients from using oral
contraceptives that increase thrombosis risk, and
recommend that pregnancy is supervised by a
multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist. It
may be necessary to alter thromboprophylaxis
during pregnancy and delivery.
adjunct additional antiplatelet agent
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
Secondary options
» dipyridamole: consult specialist for
guidance on dose
» Consider dual antiplatelet therapy with an
additional antiplatelet agent such as clopidogrel
(if the patient is not already on it). Treatment
should continue at least until aneurysm
regression is demonstrated.
» If the patient is not able to tolerate or is
resistant to aspirin, and is therefore already on
clopidogrel, consider adding dipyridamole as an
alternative. Dipyridamole is no longer generally
used for long-term thromboprophylaxis. It is an
alternative for aspirin in patients who are taking
ibuprofen, resistant or allergic to aspirin, or at
risk of Reye syndrome.[1]
regression to normal Z
score or dilation only
1st antiplatelet agent
Primary options
» aspirin: 3-5 mg/kg/day orally
Secondary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Treat with low-dose aspirin. Treatment should
continue at least until aneurysm regression is
demonstrated.
» If the patient cannot tolerate or is resistant to
aspirin, clopidogrel is an alternative.
plus follow-up + advice
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
» Follow up every 1-2 years. Consider not
performing routine 2D echocardiography unless
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Ongoing
there is evidence of inducible myocardial
ischemia, the patient has symptoms suggestive
of ischemia, or the patient has signs suggestive
of ventricular dysfunction.
» Assess cardiovascular risk (blood pressure,
fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist circumference,
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking)
every 2 years. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid
profile.
» Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia
(stress echocardiography, stress with MRI,
stress nuclear medicine, or PET) every 2-4
years, if the patient has symptoms suggestive of
ischemia or has signs suggestive of ventricular
dysfunction.
» Further imaging with angiography may not be
needed in the absence of evidence of inducible
myocardial ischemia.
» Advise that participation in competitive sports
or high-intensity activities should be guided by
results from testing for inducible myocardial
ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
» No restrictions regarding contraception and
pregnancy are applicable to this group of
patients.
adjunct additional antiplatelet agent
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
Secondary options
» dipyridamole: consult specialist for
guidance on dose
» Do not use an additional antiplatelet agent
unless there is evidence of inducible myocardial
ischemia.
after initial episode: Z score ≥10 or
absolute luminal diameter ≥8 mm;
large or giant aneurysm
current or persistent 1st antiplatelet agent
Primary options
» aspirin: 3-5 mg/kg/day orally
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
Secondary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Patients with evidence of large or giant
aneurysms, or of coronary obstruction, are at
high risk for developing myocardial ischemia.
» Treat with low-dose aspirin. Treatment should
continue at least until aneurysm regression is
demonstrated.
» If the patient cannot tolerate or is resistant to
aspirin, clopidogrel is an alternative.
plus anticoagulant
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» warfarin: 0.2 mg/kg orally as a loading
dose, followed by 0.1 mg/kg/day, titrate dose
to achieve an INR of 2-3
OR
» enoxaparin: 1 to 1.5 mg/kg subcutaneously
every 12 hours
» Patients with evidence of large or giant
aneurysms, or of coronary obstruction, are at
high risk for developing myocardial ischemia.
These patients need warfarin (to keep the INR at
2-3), or a low molecular weight heparin (LMWH)
such as enoxaparin (to keep antifactor Xa level
at 0.5 to 1.0 units/mL), in addition to antiplatelet
therapy.
» LMWH is preferred as an alternative to
warfarin for infants and toddlers in whom blood
drawing for INR testing is difficult.[1]
plus follow-up + advice
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Ongoing
» Assess patients at 1, 2, 3, 6, 9 and 12 months
after the acute episode and every 3-6 months
thereafter.
» Assess cardiovascular risk (blood pressure,
fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist circumference,
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking)
every 6-12 months. Obtain a follow-up fasting
lipid profile.
» Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia
(stress echocardiography, stress with MRI,
stress nuclear medicine, or PET) every
6-12 months, if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or has signs suggestive
of ventricular dysfunction.
» Consider further imaging with angiography for
diagnostic and prognostic purposes during the
first year and every 1-5 years thereafter.
» Advise that participation in competitive sports
or high-intensity activities should be guided by
results from testing for inducible myocardial
ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict or modify activities involving a risk of
bodily contact, trauma, or injury for patients
taking dual antiplatelet or anticoagulation
therapy.
» Discourage oral contraceptives that
increase thrombosis risk, and recommend that
pregnancy is supervised by a multidisciplinary
team including a cardiologist. Advise that
thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy and
delivery may be altered.
adjunct additional antiplatelet agent
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
Secondary options
» dipyridamole: consult specialist for
guidance on dose
» Consider dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin
and an additional antiplatelet agent such as
clopidogrel (if the patient is not already on it)
together with warfarin or low molecular weight
heparin in the setting of very extensive or distal
coronary artery aneurysms or if there is a history
of coronary artery thrombosis.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
» If the patient is not able to tolerate or is
resistant to aspirin, and is therefore already on
clopidogrel, consider adding dipyridamole as an
alternative. Dipyridamole is no longer generally
used for long-term thromboprophylaxis. It is an
alternative for aspirin in patients who are taking
ibuprofen, resistant or allergic to aspirin, or at
risk of Reye syndrome.[1]
adjunct beta-blocker
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Beta-blockers are not part of the standard
treatment of KD. They may be considered on an
individual basis for high-risk patients with large
or giant aneurysms, or for patients who develop
myocardial ischemia.[1]
» Consult a cardiology specialist for guidance on
drug selection and dose.
regression to medium
aneurysm
1st discontinue anticoagulant and start dual
antiplatelet therapy
Primary options
» aspirin: 3-5 mg/kg/day orally
-and-
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
Secondary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
-and-
» dipyridamole: consult specialist for
guidance on dose
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Discontinue anticoagulation (warfarin or low
molecular weight heparin) and substitute with an
additional antiplatelet agent.
» Treat with low-dose aspirin plus clopidogrel.
Treatment should continue at least until
aneurysm regression is demonstrated.
» If the patient cannot tolerate or is resistant to
aspirin, clopidogrel is an alternative.
plus follow-up + advice
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Ongoing
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
» Assess the patient every 6-12 months.
» Assess cardiovascular risk (blood pressure,
fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist circumference,
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking)
every 12 months. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid
profile.
» Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia
(stress echocardiography, stress with MRI,
stress nuclear medicine, or PET) every
12 months or if the patient has symptoms
suggestive of ischemia or signs suggestive of
ventricular dysfunction. Consider further imaging
with angiography every 2-5 years.
» Advise that participation in competitive sports
or high-intensity activities should be guided by
results from testing for inducible myocardial
ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict or modify activities involving a risk of
bodily contact, trauma, or injury for patients
taking dual antiplatelet or anticoagulation
therapy.
» Discourage using oral contraceptives that
increase thrombosis risk, and recommend that
pregnancy is supervised by a multidisciplinary
team including a cardiologist. Advise that
thromboprophylaxis management during
pregnancy and delivery may be altered.
adjunct beta-blocker
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Beta-blockers are not part of the standard
treatment of KD. They may be considered on an
individual basis for high-risk patients with large
or giant aneurysms, or for patients who develop
myocardial ischemia.[1]
» Consult a cardiology specialist for guidance on
drug selection and dose.
regression to small
aneurysm
1st antiplatelet agent
Primary options
» aspirin: 3-5 mg/kg/day orally
Secondary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Treat with low-dose aspirin. Treatment should
continue at least until aneurysm regression is
demonstrated.
» If the patient cannot tolerate or is resistant to
aspirin, clopidogrel is an alternative.
adjunct follow-up + advice
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
» Assess the patient every 6-12 months.
» Assess cardiovascular risks (blood pressure,
fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist circumference,
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking)
every 12 months. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid
profile.
» Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia
(stress echocardiography, stress with MRI,
stress nuclear medicine, or PET) every 1-2
years, if the patient has symptoms suggestive of
ischemia or has signs suggestive of ventricular
dysfunction. Consider further imaging with
angiography every 2-5 years.
» Advise that participation in competitive sports
or high-intensity activities should be guided by
results from testing for inducible myocardial
ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict or modify activities involving a risk of
bodily contact, trauma, or injury for patients
taking dual antiplatelet or anticoagulation
therapy.
» Advise patients as per normal about
contraception, but recommend that pregnancy is
supervised by a multidisciplinary team including
a cardiologist, and that thromboprophylaxis may
be altered during pregnancy and delivery.
adjunct discontinue dual antiplatelet therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Dual antiplatelet therapy is generally not
indicated, but additional patient and coronary
artery risk factors may be considered when
making decisions regarding thromboprophylaxis.
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Ongoing
» If patients remain on dual antiplatelet therapy,
restrict or modify risk of bodily contact or trauma.
adjunct beta-blocker
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Beta-blockers are not part of the standard
treatment of KD. They may be considered on an
individual basis for high-risk patients with large
or giant aneurysms, or for patients who develop
myocardial ischemia.[1]
» Consult a cardiology specialist for guidance on
drug selection and dose.
regression to normal Z
score or dilation only
1st antiplatelet agent
Primary options
» aspirin: 3-5 mg/kg/day orally
Secondary options
» clopidogrel: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
» Risk stratification for long-term management
is based primarily on maximal coronary artery
Z scores, and takes into account both past and
current involvement.
» Treat with low-dose aspirin. Treatment should
continue at least until aneurysm regression is
demonstrated.
» If the patient cannot tolerate or is resistant to
aspirin, clopidogrel is an alternative.
plus follow-up + advice
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every
visit.
» Follow up every 1-2 years. Consider not
performing routine 2D echocardiography unless
there is evidence of inducible myocardial
ischemia, the patient has symptoms suggestive
of ischemia, or the patient has signs suggestive
of ventricular dysfunction.
» Assess cardiovascular risk (blood pressure,
fasting lipid profile, BMI, waist circumference,
dietary and activity assessment, and smoking)
every 2 years. Obtain a follow-up fasting lipid
profile.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
» Assess for inducible myocardial ischemia
(stress echocardiography, stress with MRI,
stress nuclear medicine, or PET) every 2-5
years, if the patient has symptoms suggestive
of ischemia or signs suggestive of ventricular
dysfunction. Further imaging with angiography
may not be needed in the absence of evidence
of inducible myocardial ischemia.
» Advise that participation in competitive sports
or high-intensity activities should be guided by
results from testing for inducible myocardial
ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
Restrict or modify activities involving a risk of
bodily contact, trauma, or injury for patients
taking dual antiplatelet or anticoagulation
therapy.
» Advise patients about contraception as per
normal, but recommend that pregnancy is
supervised by a multidisciplinary team including
a cardiologist, and that thromboprophylaxis may
be altered during pregnancy and delivery.
adjunct intensify or discontinue
thromboprophylaxis
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Patient and coronary artery characteristics
may influence decisions about
thromboprophylaxis.
» If patients are on dual antiplatelet therapy,
restrict or modify risk of bodily contact or trauma.
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
Emerging
Intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) plus corticosteroid (all
patients)
One multicenter phase 3 clinical trial across Europe is currently exploring the hypothesis that a corticosteroid
used as adjunctive treatment may reduce the frequency of refractory KD and thus may improve coronary
outcomes in unselected KD cases: the Kawasaki disease coronary artery aneurysm prevention (KD-CAAP)
trial, (ISRCTN71987471). Given that coronary artery aneurysm (CAA) complication rates seen in the UK
and across Europe are higher than historically perceived (16% to 42%), all KD patients are arguably at high-
risk of CAA despite IVIG and could therefore potentially benefit from adjunctive corticosteroids as primary
treatment. KD-CAAP will therefore determine the efficacy and safety of adjunctive prednisone combined with
IVIG and aspirin for prevention of CAA in unselected KD patients across Europe, compared with IVIG and
aspirin alone. The primary outcome is CAA frequency within 12 weeks.[47]
Statins
Although the American Heart Association (AHA) Kawasaki disease guidelines (2017) recommend
consideration of statin therapy, the authors of this topic report that use of statins in acute and long-term
management of patients with KD has not become widespread US clinical practice and remains clinician
dependent. Moreover, a 2019 scientific statement from the AHA states, "data are still limited regarding the
role of statin therapy in patients with CAAs [coronary artery aneurysms]".[75] The potential utility of statin
therapy is based on statins' generalized anti-inflammatory effect and their effect on myointimal proliferation in
the arterial wall.[76]
Low-dose aspirin (as initial treatment)
Low-dose aspirin with IVIG for the initial treatment of KD may be as effective as the current practice of
higher-dose aspirin with IVIG and could decrease adverse events. European guidelines state that future
guidelines may recommend this approach but note a prospective controlled clinical trial has not yet been
conducted. One retrospective cohort study of 358 patients showed no significant benefits of high-dose aspirin
versus low-dose aspirin in terms of coronary artery aneurysm development, IVIG resistance, or disease
recurrence. Coronary ectasia rate and length of hospital stay were significantly greater in the high-dose
aspirin group.[77] One meta-analysis of 12,176 patients showed no significant difference in the incidence of
coronary artery aneurysms in patients treated with high-dose versus low-dose aspirin. Patients in the high-
dose aspirin treatment group had a slightly faster resolution of fever, but there were no differences in the
rates of IVIG resistance or the length of hospital stay between the two treatment groups.[78]
Secondary prevention
In the case of KD, long-term management and secondary prevention overlap. In 2019, the American Heart
Association (AHA) made general recommendations for cardiovascular risk reduction in high-risk pediatric
patients, including those with KD.[75] However, the authors of this topic suggest following the more detailed
long-term management recommendations from the 2017 AHA guidelines.[89]
• Promote healthy lifestyle and activity at every visit.
• Use an alternative antiplatelet agent such as clopidogrel if long-term treatment with aspirin is indicated
but the patient cannot tolerate, or is resistant to, aspirin.
• Restrict physical contact sports in patients on anticoagulation or dual antiplatelet therapy. Participation
in competitive sports or high-intensity activities should be guided by results from testing for inducible
myocardial ischemia or exercise-induced arrhythmias.
• Assess cardiovascular risk factors including blood pressure, fasting lipid profile, body mass index,
waist circumference, diet, activity, and smoking at time intervals appropriate to the disease severity.
• Include history and physical exam, echocardiography, and electrocardiography in follow-up cardiology
assessment at time intervals appropriate to the disease severity.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Kawasaki disease Management
MANAGEMENT
• Include stress echocardiography, stress with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), stress nuclear
medicine, or positron emission tomography in additional cardiology assessment to detect inducible
myocardial ischemia at time intervals appropriate to the disease severity.
• Include angiography by computed tomography, MRI, or invasive angiography if further imaging is
needed at time intervals appropriate to the disease severity.
• Discourage oral contraceptive use in patients who have ever had medium aneurysms, or larger (Z
score ≥5), and who still have small aneurysms (Z score ≥2.5) or larger. Advise that pregnancy be
supervised by a multidisciplinary team including a cardiologist, and that anticoagulants or antiplatelet
therapy may require adjustment during pregnancy or delivery.
Patient discussions
Advise patients and families to remember that having had KD is part of the patient's permanent medical
history. Inform them that children who have coronary artery aneurysms need continued medical testing
(including screening for lipid disorders from 2 years of age and for the development of hypertension),
long-term medications, and, sometimes, precautions with physical activity (if on anticoagulation therapy
or with myocardial ischemia or arrhythmias).[75] Patients and families may benefit from psychological
support, especially during teenage and young adult life.[12]
Advise parents that children with large or giant aneurysms, or myocardial ischemia, will need long-term
follow-up in the pediatric cardiology clinic.
Arrange and discuss proper transition from the pediatric cardiology clinic to a specialist adult Kawasaki
disease cardiology clinic, as ongoing problems may differ from adult ischemic heart disease. During the
transition period, joint pediatric and adult care is recommended.[12]
Patients who have current or previous coronary aneurysms (American Heart Association level 3 or above)
are advised to have a person-specific protocol in case of a suspected cardiac emergency. Copies of this
document should be held by the patient, parents, school or care-providers, and general physician, as
well as local specialist cardiac centers and emergency services. It should include a copy of the patient's
medical history with instructions to emergency services on which specialist center to transport the patient
to, as well as their most recent ECG and coronary imaging and instructions on how to contact their
specialist team for advice, both in and out of clinic hours.[12]
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Kawasaki disease Follow up
Monitoring
Monitoring
Patients will be discharged home on high-dose aspirin if afebrile for 24 hours. C-reactive protein should
be repeated within 1 week and, if normalized, aspirin dosing will be switched to low-dose regimen. These
patients should be followed up by a cardiologist. The number of patients with myocardial and vascular
complications in adulthood, however, has decreased since the introduction of intravenous immune
globulin (IVIG) treatment.[84] The American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation recommends
that patients should be monitored daily for fevers (defined as an oral temperature in older children and
a rectal temperature in infants of >100.4°F [38.0°C] or an axillary temperature of >99.5°F [37.5°C])
for 2 weeks following discharge. In addition, parents or guardians should be instructed on how to take a
temperature and told to contact the physician should fever recur.[37]
In addition:
• Patients who presented with the classic manifestations of KD and had an uncomplicated disease
course can be followed up with echocardiogram at 8 weeks. If normal, low-dose aspirin can be
discontinued. Patients with coronary artery aneurysms (CAAs) should be referred to cardiology.
• Patients who presented with the classic manifestations of KD, but with a more protracted course
of fever, should be followed-up with echocardiogram at 2 weeks. If normal, follow-up should be
rescheduled for 6-8 weeks from disease onset and, if the echocardiogram is normal, low-dose
aspirin can be discontinued and no further follow-up is needed. If CAAs are detected at any stage,
refer to cardiologist.
• Screen all children who have had KD with coronary artery aneurysms for lipid disorders beginning
at age 2 years, and for the development of hypertension.[75]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Kawasaki disease Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
myocarditis short term high
Is common, but rarely causes congestive heart failure.
Responds promptly to intravenous immune globulin.
pericarditis with small pericardial effusions short term medium
Complete resolution with intravenous immune globulin.
Occurs in 25% of patients who are acutely ill before intravenous immune globulin treatment.
coronary aneurysms short term low
There are diffuse coronary artery ectasia, small aneurysms (internal luminal diameter <5 mm), and giant
aneurysms (≥8 mm). Small aneurysms can resolve in up to 2 years. Giant coronary artery aneurysms
(CAAs) are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. If the echocardiogram findings are
abnormal at any stage in the course of illness, the patient should be referred to a pediatric cardiologist for
a complete cardiac workup and follow-up care. The risk of CAAs is the highest in: children with KD who did
not receive IVIG within 10 days of fever onset; patients who have persistent fever despite IVIG treatment;
patients with laboratory findings suggesting persistent inflammation (increased erythrocyte sedimentation
rate, C-reactive protein [CRP], or both); and young children (<6 months old) or older children (>8 years old)
and male sex are also among the high risk. 
62 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 63 ===
Kawasaki disease Follow up
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
Coronary artery ectasia
BMJ Case Reports 2009; doi:10.1136/bcr.10.2008.1113
In IVIG-treated patients, the following are also associated with higher risk: higher counts of neutrophils,
bands and platelets; anemia; and a fever that does not resolve within the first day of the IVIG
treatment.[79] [80]
Other treatment failure predictors after IVIG include: increase in CRP, lactate dehydrogenase, and bilirubin
levels.[80] [81] Some data suggest that sodium levels of <135 mEq/L at initial presentation may predict
giant CAA development.[82]
Black ethnicity background may play a protective role for the development of coronary abnormalities.[83]
If CAAs are confirmed, an additional antiplatelet agent (e.g., clopidogrel) should be added and the patient
should continue to be monitored by a cardiologist.
Patients with known giant aneurysms during the acute phase of KD are likely to have cardiovascular
comorbidities as young adults. These patients should be followed up by a cardiologist. The number of
patients with myocardial and vascular complications in adulthood, however, has decreased since the
introduction of IVIG treatment.[84]
A study of patients from 1979-2014 in the US found that overall CAA regression rate was approximately
75%, with a low regression rate of 16% in patients with large/giant CAA and a high regression rate of 85%
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
63
=== Page 64 ===
Kawasaki disease Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
in those with small CAA at diagnosis. Notably, the overall regression rate was higher in the most recent
5-year period (90%). These rates are higher than those previously reported and may be related to better
recognition of KD.[85]
valvulitis short term low
Rarely merits valve replacement.
Usually mitral, occurs in only 1% of patients.
arthritis short term low
Responds promptly to intravenous immune globulin and high-dose aspirin. The American College of
Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation recommend the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in
patients who are symptomatic following IVIG treatment, though this is not given in combination with
aspirin.[37]
mild hepatic dysfunction, rarely jaundice short term low
In the acute phase. Occurs in 10% to 30% of patients; responds promptly to intravenous immune globulin.
gallbladder disease short term low
Hydrops (diagnosed by means of ultrasonography) occurs in less than 10% of patients. It usually resolves
without surgical intervention.
pneumonitis short term low
Responds promptly to intravenous immune globulin.
aseptic meningitis short term low
Rare, but can occur as a manifestation of Kawasaki disease or as a consequence of intravenous immune
globulin treatment. Complete spontaneous resolution.
macrophage activation syndrome (also known as
secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis)
short term low
Rare, but potentially fatal inflammatory reaction driven by excessive cytokine production, macrophage
activation, and hemophagocytosis. Diagnosis should be considered in patients with suspected KD who
have persistent fever, splenomegaly, high ferritin, low platelets, and high aspartate aminotransferase.[88]
coronary thrombosis long term low
Medical or surgical interventions as recommended by the cardiologist.
Treatment of thrombotic coronary occlusion is based upon recommendations for treatment of adults with
acute coronary syndromes.
Thrombolytic therapy consists of use of streptokinase, urokinase, or alteplase (tissue plasminogen
activator) in combination with aspirin and heparin (unfractionated or low molecular weight). Thrombosis
can occur in giant aneurysms despite therapeutic levels of anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy.[86]
Children with ongoing significant stenotic coronary artery aneurysms may develop a network of collateral
64 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 65 ===
Kawasaki disease Follow up
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
vessels, resulting in a greater tolerance of thrombotic occlusion in the main vessel. If immediate
intervention is not required, there should be an urgent review of antithrombotic therapy and the overall
management plan.[86]
acute coronary syndromes long term low
Medical or surgical interventions as recommended by the cardiologist.
Acute myocardial infarction is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in Kawasaki disease, and
patients with giant aneurysms are at the greatest risk. Risk of myocardial infarction or myocardial ischemia
is highest in the first 2 years after diagnosis; patients with giant aneurysms after KD have a; 60% rate of
cardiac events over 30 years, with the highest risk in those with bilateral giant coronary aneurysms.[87]
Diagnosis can be difficult in children and adults with previous Kawasaki disease, as they may present
with atypical and nonspecific symptoms. This is particularly so for young children, who may present with
poorly localized pain, restlessness, unusual pallor, breathlessness, or unexplained crying. Troponin and
electrocardiogram may initially be normal, even with extensive ischemia. Urgent imaging is the only way
to exclude thrombosis within aneurysms in children with chest pain or who are unwell. Unless the cause
of illness is clearly noncardiac in origin (e.g., epilepsy, trauma, bacterial infection, acute abdomen, acute
gastroenteritis), all patients should be seen in a specialized cardiac center for evaluation.[12]
All patients should have a clear management plan for antithrombotic treatment with tissue plasminogen
activator or streptokinase.
In some settings, percutaneous coronary intervention is an option, depending on transport time to an
interventional cardiology center, the patient's size if they are a child, and the technical challenges of
instrumentation in vessels previously damaged by Kawasaki disease.[12]
rupture of giant coronary artery aneurysms long term low
Extremely rare and can be associated with hemopericardium. Most complications relate to healing with
stenosis or persistence of giant coronary artery aneurysms.
Medical or surgical interventions as recommended by the cardiologist.
systemic artery aneurysms long term low
Rare, but can occur in the following arteries: femoral, subclavian, iliac, brachial, axillary, and others.
Surgical intervention may be needed.
peripheral extremity gangrene long term low
Vascular surgeon needs to be consulted.
bowel ischemia and necrosis long term low
Pediatric general surgeon needs to be consulted.
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
65
=== Page 66 ===
Kawasaki disease Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Prognosis
KD is an acute, self-limiting illness. The immediate outcome has improved dramatically, with a decrease in
the frequency of coronary artery aneurysms to less than 3% following the introduction of intravenous immune
globulin (IVIG) therapy. Overall, the mortality rate is less than 0.5%.
However, in untreated patients it is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Delayed diagnosis,
particularly of incomplete KD, and KD in very young children, poses a challenge as these patients have a
high risk of aneurysms. The long-term prognosis of children with giant aneurysms remains a concern due to
their associated risk of ischemia or thrombosis. Management of such patients includes thromboprophylaxis
and careful identification of evolving stenoses. Selected patients may need invasive revascularization
procedures.
Clinicians should therefore focus on early diagnosis and rapid escalation of treatment when there is no
immediate response to IVIG. It remains to be seen whether other anti-inflammatory agents, such as new
immunosuppressive therapies or new anticytokine biologics, will further improve management and outcome
of KD.
66 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 67 ===
Kawasaki disease Guidelines
Diagnostic guidelines
International
Revised recommendations of the Italian Society of Pediatrics
about the general management of Kawasaki disease (https://
ijponline.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13052-021-00962-4)   [42]
Published by: Italian Society of Pediatrics Last published: 2021
European consensus-based recommendations for the diagnosis
and treatment of Kawasaki disease - the SHARE initiative (https://
academic.oup.com/rheumatology/article/58/4/672/5233868?login=false)   [31]
Published by: The European Single Hub and Access point for paediatric
Rheumatology
Last published: 2019
Diagnosis, treatment, and long-term management of Kawasaki disease
(https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements)   [1]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2017
Treatment guidelines
International
Guideline for the management of Kawasaki disease (https://
www.rheumatology.org/Practice-Quality/Clinical-Support/Clinical-Practice-
Guidelines/Vasculitis)   [37]
Published by: American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation Last published: 2022
Diagnosis, treatment, and long-term management of Kawasaki disease
(https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements)   [1]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2017
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
67
=== Page 68 ===
Kawasaki disease References
REFERENCES
Key articles
• McCrindle BW, Rowley AH, Newburger JW, et al; American Heart Association. Diagnosis, treatment,
and long-term management of Kawasaki disease: a scientific statement for health professionals
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017 Apr 25;135(17):e927-99.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/cir.0000000000000484)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28356445?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Kawasaki T, Kosaki T, Okawa S, et al. A new infantile acute febrile mucocutaneous lymph
node syndrome (MLNS) prevailing in Japan. Pediatrics. 1974 Sep;54(3):271-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4153258?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• de Graeff N, Groot N, Ozen S, et al. European consensus-based recommendations for the diagnosis
and treatment of Kawasaki disease - the SHARE initiative. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2019 Apr
1;58(4):672-82.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/rheumatology/article/58/4/672/5233868?
login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30535127?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Gorelik M, Chung SA, Ardalan K, et al. 2021 American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis
Foundation guideline for the management of Kawasaki disease. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken). 2022 Apr;74(4):538-48. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35257507?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Newburger JW, Takahashi M, Beiser AS, et al. A single intravenous infusion of gamma globulin as
compared with four infusions in the treatment of acute Kawasaki syndrome. N Engl J Med. 1991 Jun
6;324(23):1633-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1709446?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Lei WT, Chang LS, Zeng BY, et al. Pharmacologic interventions for Kawasaki disease in children: A
network meta-analysis of 56 randomized controlled trials. EBioMedicine. 2022 Apr;78:103946.  Full
text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8933672)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35306339?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• McCrindle BW, Rowley AH, Newburger JW, et al; American Heart Association. Diagnosis, treatment,
and long-term management of Kawasaki disease: a scientific statement for health professionals
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017 Apr 25;135(17):e927-99.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/cir.0000000000000484)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28356445?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. McCrindle BW, Rowley AH, Newburger JW, et al; American Heart Association. Diagnosis, treatment,
and long-term management of Kawasaki disease: a scientific statement for health professionals
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017 Apr 25;135(17):e927-99.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/cir.0000000000000484)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28356445?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 69 ===
Kawasaki disease References
2. Kawasaki T. Acute febrile mucocutaneous syndrome with lymphoid involvement with specific
desquamation of the fingers and toes in children [in Japanese]. Arerugi. 1967 Mar;16(3):178-222.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6062087?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Mason WH, Takahashi M. Kawasaki syndrome. Clin Infect Dis. 1999 Feb;28(2):169-85. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10064222?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Callinan LS, Holman RC, Vugia DJ, et al. Kawasaki disease hospitalization rate among children
younger than 5 years of age in California, 2003-2010. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2014 Jul;33(7):781-3.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24469070?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Tulloh RMR, Mayon-White R, Harnden A, et al. Kawasaki disease: a prospective population survey
in the UK and Ireland from 2013 to 2015. Arch Dis Child. 2019 Jul;104(7):640-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30104394?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. Lin MT, Wu MH. The global epidemiology of Kawasaki disease: Review and future perspectives. Glob
Cardiol Sci Pract. 2017 Oct 31;2017(3):e201720.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5856963)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29564341?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Holman RC, Curns AT, Belay ED, et al. Kawasaki syndrome hospitalizations in the United States,
1997 and 2000. Pediatrics. 2003 Sep;112(3 Pt 1):495-501. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12949272?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Holman RC, Belay ED, Clarke MJ, et al. Kawasaki syndrome among American Indian and Alaska
native children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1999 May;18(5):451-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10353519?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Yanagawa H, Nakamura Y, Ojima T, et al. Changes in epidemic patterns of Kawasaki disease
in Japan. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1999 Jan;18(1):64-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9951983?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Makino N, Nakamura Y, Yashiro M, et al. Descriptive epidemiology of Kawasaki disease in Japan,
2011-2012: from the results of the 22nd nationwide survey. J Epidemiol. 2015;25(3):239-45.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4341001)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25716368?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Hata A, Onouchi Y. Susceptibility genes for Kawasaki disease: toward implementation of
personalized medicine. J Hum Genet. 2009 Feb;54(2):67-73. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19158812?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Brogan P, Burns JC, Cornish J, et al. Lifetime cardiovascular management of patients with previous
Kawasaki disease. Heart. 2020 Mar;106(6):411-420.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC7057818)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31843876?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Yanagawa H, Yashiro M, Nakamura Y, et al. Nationwide surveillance of Kawasaki disease in Japan,
1984 to 1993. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1995 Jan;14(1):69-71. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7715997?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
69
=== Page 70 ===
Kawasaki disease References
REFERENCES
14. Dominguez SR, Anderson MS, Glode MP, et al. Blinded case-control study of the relationship between
human coronavirus NL63 and Kawasaki syndrome. J Infect Dis. 2006 Dec 15;194(12):1697-701.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17109341?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Abinun M, Cant AJ. Toxic shock syndrome toxin-secreting Staphylococcus aureus in Kawasaki
syndrome. Lancet. 1994 Jan 29;343(8892):300. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7905129?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Meissner HC, Leung DY. Superantigens, conventional antigens and etiology of Kawasaki syndrome.
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2000 Feb;19(2):91-4. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10693992?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Leung DY, Meissner HC, Fulton DR, et al. Toxic shock syndrome toxin-secreting Staphylococcus
aureus in Kawasaki syndrome. Lancet. 1993 Dec 4;342(8884):1385-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7901681?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Rowley AH. Kawasaki disease: novel insights into etiology and genetic susceptibility. Annu
Rev Med. 2011 Feb 18;62:69-77. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20690826?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Hata A, Onouchi Y. Susceptibility genes for Kawasaki disease: toward implementation of
personalized medicine. J Hum Genet. 2009 Feb;54(2):67-73. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19158812?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Khor CC, Davila S, Breunis WB, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies FCGR2A as a
susceptibility locus for Kawasaki disease. Nat Genet. 2011 Nov 13;43(12):1241-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22081228?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Xie X, Shi X, Liu M. The roles of genetic factors in Kawasaki disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of genetic association studies. Pediatr Cardiol. 2018 Feb;39(2):207-25. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29098351?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Rowley AH, Shulman ST. New developments in the search for etiologic agent of Kawasaki disease.
Curr Opin Pediatr. 2007 Feb;19(1):71-4. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17224665?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Dajani AS, Taubert KA, Gerber MA, et al. Diagnosis and therapy of Kawasaki disease in children.
Circulation. 1993 May;87(5):1776-80. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8491037?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Takahashi K, Oharaseki T, Naoe S, et al. Neutrophilic involvement in the damage to coronary
arteries in acute stage of Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Int. 2005 Jun;47(3):305-10. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15910456?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Senzaki H. The pathophysiology of coronary artery aneurysms in Kawasaki disease: role of matrix
metalloproteinases. Arch Dis Child. 2006 Oct;91(10):847-51.  Full text (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC2066006)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16990356?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 71 ===
Kawasaki disease References
26. Suzuki A, Miyagawa-Tomita S, Komatsu K, et al. Immunohistochemical study of apparently intact
coronary artery in a child after Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Int. 2004 Oct;46(5):590-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15491390?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Onouchi Y, Tamari M, Takahashi A, et al. A genomewide linkage analysis of Kawasaki disease:
evidence for linkage to chromosome 12. J Hum Genet. 2007;52(2):179-90. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17160344?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Satou GM, Giamelli J, Gewitz MH. Kawasaki disease: diagnosis, management, and long-term
implications. Cardiol Rev. 2007 Jul-Aug;15(4):163-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17575479?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Kawasaki T, Kosaki T, Okawa S, et al. A new infantile acute febrile mucocutaneous lymph
node syndrome (MLNS) prevailing in Japan. Pediatrics. 1974 Sep;54(3):271-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4153258?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Kuemmerle-Deschner JB, Hansmann S, Wulffraat NM, et al. Recommendations for collaborative
paediatric research including biobanking in Europe: a Single Hub and Access point for paediatric
Rheumatology in Europe (SHARE) initiative. Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Mar;77(3):319-327. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29021237?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. de Graeff N, Groot N, Ozen S, et al. European consensus-based recommendations for the diagnosis
and treatment of Kawasaki disease - the SHARE initiative. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2019 Apr
1;58(4):672-82.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/rheumatology/article/58/4/672/5233868?
login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30535127?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Manlhiot C, Millar K, Golding F, et al. Improved classification of coronary artery abnormalities based
only on coronary artery z-scores after Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Cardiol. 2009 Dec 19;31(2):242-9.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20024653?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Saguil A, Fargo M, Grogan S. Diagnosis and management of Kawasaki disease. Am Fam Physician.
2015 Mar 15;91(6):365-71.  Full text (https://www.aafp.org/afp/2015/0315/p365.html)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25822554?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Wen JX, Bai X, Niu Y, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide
for Kawasaki disease: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Clin Pract.
2021 Nov;75(11):e14538. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34133819?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Colomba C, La Placa S, Saporito L, et al. Intestinal involvement in Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 2018
Nov;202:186-93.  Full text (https://www.jpeds.com/article/S0022-3476(18)30833-3/fulltext#secst0045)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30029859?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. Lee KY, Rhim JW, Kang JH. Kawasaki disease: laboratory findings and an immunopathogenesis
on the premise of a "protein homeostasis system". Yonsei Med J. 2012 Mar;53(2):262-75.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3282974)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22318812?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
71
=== Page 72 ===
Kawasaki disease References
REFERENCES
37. Gorelik M, Chung SA, Ardalan K, et al. 2021 American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis
Foundation guideline for the management of Kawasaki disease. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken). 2022 Apr;74(4):538-48. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35257507?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Dorfman AL, Geva T, Samyn MM, et al. SCMR expert consensus statement for cardiovascular
magnetic resonance of acquired and non-structural pediatric heart disease. J Cardiovasc Magn
Reson. 2022 Jul 21;24(1):44.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9302232)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35864534?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Smith MT, Lester-Smith D, Zurynski Y, et al. Persistence of acute rheumatic fever in a
tertiary children's hospital. J Paediatr Child Health. 2011 Apr;47(4):198-203. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21199062?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Bansal N, Azeka E, Neunert C, et al. Multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated with COVID-19
anti-thrombosis guideline of care for children by action. Pediatr Cardiol. 2021 Oct;42(7):1635-39.  Full
text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8169785)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34076713?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Henderson LA, Canna SW, Friedman KG, et al. American College of Rheumatology clinical
guidance for multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children associated with SARS-CoV-2 and
hyperinflammation in pediatric COVID-19: Version 2. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2021 Apr;73(4):e13-29.  Full
text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8559788)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33277976?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Marchesi A, Rigante D, Cimaz R, et al. Revised recommendations of the Italian Society of Pediatrics
about the general management of Kawasaki disease. Ital J Pediatr. 2021 Jan 25;47(1):16.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7830049)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33494789?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Oates-Whitehead RM, Baumer JH, Haines L, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin for the treatment
of Kawasaki disease in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003 Oct 20;(4):CD004000.  Full
text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD004000/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14584002?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Newburger JW, Takahashi M, Beiser AS, et al. A single intravenous infusion of gamma globulin as
compared with four infusions in the treatment of acute Kawasaki syndrome. N Engl J Med. 1991 Jun
6;324(23):1633-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1709446?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Chiang MH, Liu HE, Wang JL. Low-dose or no aspirin administration in acute-phase Kawasaki
disease: a meta-analysis and systematic review. Arch Dis Child. 2021 Jul;106(7):662-8. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33172886?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Lei WT, Chang LS, Zeng BY, et al. Pharmacologic interventions for Kawasaki disease in children: A
network meta-analysis of 56 randomized controlled trials. EBioMedicine. 2022 Apr;78:103946.  Full
text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8933672)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35306339?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 73 ===
Kawasaki disease References
47. Riyad C, Brogan P. A practical approach to refractory Kawasaki disease. Paediatrics and Child Health.
2022 Nov 17;32(12):476-9.
48. Tremoulet AH, Best BM, Song S, et al. Resistance to intravenous immunoglobulin in children with
Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 2008 Jul;153(1):117-21.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC2526555)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18571548?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Zheng X, Li J, Yue P, et al. Is there an association between intravenous immunoglobulin
resistance and coronary artery lesion in Kawasaki disease?-Current evidence based on a meta-
analysis. PLoS One. 2021;16(3):e0248812.  Full text (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?
id=10.1371/journal.pone.0248812)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33764989?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Sleeper LA, Minich LL, McCrindle BM, et al; Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Evaluation of
Kawasaki disease risk-scoring systems for intravenous immunoglobulin resistance. J Pediatr. 2011
May;158(5):831-35.e3.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3075321)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21168857?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Davies S, Sutton N, Blackstock S, et al. Predicting IVIG resistance in UK Kawasaki disease. Arch
Dis Child. 2015 Apr;100(4):366-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25670405?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Jakob A, von Kries R, Horstmann J, et al. Failure to predict high-risk Kawasaki disease patients in a
population-based study cohort in Germany. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2018 Sep;37(9):850-5. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29406464?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Green J, Wardle AJ, Tulloh RM. Corticosteroids for the treatment of Kawasaki disease in
children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2022 May 27;5(5):CD011188.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD011188.pub3/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35622534?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Eleftheriou D, Levin M, Shingadia D, et al. Management of Kawasaki disease. Arch Dis Child.
2014 Jan;99(1):74-83.  Full text (https://adc.bmj.com/content/99/1/74.long)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24162006?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Newburger JW, Sleeper LA, McCrindle BW; Pediatric Heart Network Investigators. Randomized trial
of pulsed corticosteroid therapy for primary treatment of Kawasaki disease. N Engl J Med. 2007 Feb
15;356(7):663-75.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa061235)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17301297?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Inoue Y, Okada Y, Shinohara M, et al. A multicenter prospective randomized trial of corticosteroids
in primary therapy for Kawasaki disease: clinical course and coronary artery outcome. J
Pediatr. 2006 Sep;149(3):336-41. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16939743?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Kobayashi T, Saji T, Otani T, et al. Efficacy of immunoglobulin plus prednisolone for prevention of
coronary artery abnormalities in severe Kawasaki disease (RAISE study): a randomised, open-label,
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
73
=== Page 74 ===
Kawasaki disease References
REFERENCES
blinded-endpoints trial. Lancet. 2012 Apr 28;379(9826):1613-20. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22405251?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58. Furukawa T, Kishiro M, Akimoto K, et al. Effects of steroid pulse therapy on immunoglobulin-resistant
Kawasaki disease. Arch Dis Child. 2008 Feb;93(2):142-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17962370?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Okada K, Hara J, Maki I, et al. Pulse methylprednisolone with gammaglobulin as an initial treatment for
acute Kawasaki disease. Eur J Pediatr. 2009 Feb;168(2):181-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18446365?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Sundel RP, Baker AL, Fulton DR, et al. Corticosteroids in the initial treatment of Kawasaki disease:
report of a randomized trial. Pediatr. 2003 Jun;142(6):611-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12838187?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Chen S, Dong Y, Yin Y, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin plus corticosteroid to prevent coronary
artery abnormalities in Kawasaki disease: a meta-analysis. Heart. 2013 Jan;99(2):76-82. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22869678?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Newburger JW. Kawasaki disease: medical therapies. Congenit Heart Dis. 2017 Sep;12(5):641-3.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28580631?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Burns JC, Mason WH, Hauger SB, et al. Infliximab treatment for refractory Kawasaki syndrome.
J Pediatr. 2005 May;146(5):662-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15870671?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64. Burns JC, Roberts SC, Tremoulet AH, et al. Infliximab versus second intravenous immunoglobulin
for treatment of resistant Kawasaki disease in the USA (KIDCARE): a randomised, multicentre
comparative effectiveness trial. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2021 Dec;5(12):852-861.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1016/S2352-4642(21)00270-4)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34715057?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
65. Yamaji N, da Silva Lopes K, Shoda T, et al. TNF-α blockers for the treatment of Kawasaki disease
in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Aug 16;8(8):CD012448.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD012448.pub2/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31425625?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Li X, Tang Y, Ding Y, et al. Higher efficacy of infliximab than immunoglobulin on Kawasaki disease,
a meta-analysis. Eur J Pharmacol. 2021 May 15;899:173985. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33652059?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Chan H, Chi H, You H, et al. Indirect-comparison meta-analysis of treatment options for patients
with refractory Kawasaki disease. BMC Pediatr. 2019 May 17;19(1):158.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6524334)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31101091?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. Crayne CB, Mitchell C, Beukelman T. Comparison of second-line therapy in IVIg-refractory
Kawasaki disease: a systematic review. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2019 Nov 27;17(1):77.  Full text
74 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 75 ===
Kawasaki disease References
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6882052)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31775898?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
69. Nomura O, Fukuda S, Ota E, et al. Monoclonal antibody and anti-cytokine biologics for Kawasaki
disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2021 Oct;51(5):1045-56.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34416626?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. Sonoda K, Mori M, Hokosaki T, et al. Infliximab plus plasma exchange rescue therapy in
Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 2014 May;164(5):1128-32.e1. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24560183?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
71. Koné-Paut I, Tellier S, Belot A, et al. Phase II open label study of anakinra in intravenous
immunoglobulin-resistant Kawasaki disease. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2021 Jan;73(1):151-61. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32779863?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Wardle AJ, Connolly GM, Seager MJ, et al. Corticosteroids for the treatment of Kawasaki
disease in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Jan 27;(1):CD011188.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD011188.pub2/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28129459?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Burns JC, Best BM, Mejias AJ, et al. Infliximab treatment of intravenous immunoglobulin-resistant
Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 2008 Dec;153(6):833-8.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC2856847)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18672254?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74. Sonoda K, Mori M, Hokosaki T, et al. Infliximab plus plasma exchange rescue therapy in
Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 2014 May;164(5):1128-32.e1. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24560183?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
75. de Ferranti SD, Steinberger J, Ameduri R, et al. Cardiovascular risk reduction in high-risk pediatric
patients: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2019 Mar
26;139(13):e603-34.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000618)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30798614?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. Suda K, Tahara N, Honda A, et al. Statin reduces persistent coronary arterial inflammation evaluated
by serial ¹⁸fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography imaging long after Kawasaki disease.
Int J Cardiol. 2014 Oct 22;179:61-2. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25464413?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
77. Amarilyo G, Koren Y, Brik Simon D, et al. High-dose aspirin for Kawasaki disease: outdated myth
or effective aid? Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2017 Mar-Apr;35 Suppl 103(1):209-12. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28079513?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
78. Jia X, Du X, Bie S, et al. What dose of aspirin should be used in the initial treatment of Kawasaki
disease? A meta-analysis. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2020 Aug 1;59(8):1826-33.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/rheumatology/article/59/8/1826/5803118?login=false)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32159800?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
75
=== Page 76 ===
Kawasaki disease References
REFERENCES
79. Beiser AS, Takahasha M, Baker AL, et al. A predictive instrument for coronary artery aneurysms
in Kawasaki disease. US Multicenter Kawasaki Disease Study Group. Am J Cardiol. 1998 May
1;81(9):1116-20. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9605052?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80. Mori M, Imagawa T, Yasui K, et al. Predictors of coronary artery lesions after intravenous gamma-
globulin treatment in Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. J Pediatr. 2000 Aug;137(2):177-80. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10931408?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
81. Fukunishi M, Kikkawa M, Hamana K, et al. Prediction of non-responsiveness to intravenous high-dose
gamma-globulin therapy in patients with Kawasaki disease at onset. J Pediatr. 2000 Aug;137(2):172-6.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10931407?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82. Nakamura Y, Yashiro M, Uehara R, et al. Use of laboratory data to identify risk factors of giant
coronary aneurysms due to Kawasaki disease. Pediatr Int. 2004 Feb;46(1):33-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15043662?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
83. Marquez J, Gedalia O, Candia L, et al. Kawasaki disease: clinical spectrum of 88 patients in a high-
prevalence African-American population. J Natl Med Assoc. 2008 Jan;100(1):28-32. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18277805?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
84. Gersony WM. The adult after Kawasaki disease: the risks for late coronary events. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2009 Nov 17;54(21):1921-3.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/54/21/1921)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19909871?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
85. Friedman KG, Gauvreau K, Hamaoka-Okamoto A, et al. Coronary artery aneurysm in Kawasaki
disease: risk factors for progressive disease and adverse cardiac events in US population.
J Am Heart Assoc. 2016 Sep 15;5(9):e003289.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/JAHA.116.003289)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27633390?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
86. Burns JC, El-Said H, Tremoulet AH, et al. Management of myocardial infarction in children with giant
coronary artery aneurysms after Kawasaki disease. J Pediatr. 2020 Jun;221:230-4.  Full text (https://
www.jpeds.com/article/S0022-3476(20)30246-8/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/32312552?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
87. Tsuda E, Hamaoka K, Suzuki H, et al. A survey of the 3-decade outcome for patients with giant
aneurysms caused by Kawasaki disease. Am Heart J. 2014 Feb;167(2):249-58. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24439987?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
88. García-Pavón S, Yamazaki-Nakashimada MA, Báez M, et al. Kawasaki disease complicated
with macrophage activation syndrome: a systematic review. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol.
2017 Aug;39(6):445-51. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28562511?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
89. McCrindle BW, Rowley AH, Newburger JW, et al; American Heart Association. Diagnosis, treatment,
and long-term management of Kawasaki disease: a scientific statement for health professionals
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017 Apr 25;135(17):e927-99.  Full text (https://
76 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 77 ===
Kawasaki disease References
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/cir.0000000000000484)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28356445?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
77
=== Page 78 ===
Kawasaki disease Images
IMAGES
Images
Figure 1: Coronary artery ectasia
BMJ Case Reports 2009; doi:10.1136/bcr.10.2008.1113
78 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 79 ===
Kawasaki disease Images
Figure 2: SHARE recommendations for the management of suspected incomplete Kawasaki disease
de Graeff N, Groot N, Ozen S, et al. European consensus-based recommendations for the diagnosis and
treatment of Kawasaki disease - the SHARE initiative. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2019;58(4):672-682.
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
79
=== Page 80 ===
Kawasaki disease Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
80 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 81 ===
Kawasaki disease Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 14, 2022.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
81
=== Page 82 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Paul Brogan, BSc(Hon), MBChB(Hon), FRCPCH, MSc, PhD
Professor of vasculitis
University College London, London, UK
DISCLOSURES: PB is co-chief investigator of the KDCAAP trial, and is an author of several references
cited in this topic.
Kirsty McLellan, BMedSci, MBChB, MRCPCH
Specialist Registrar in Paediatric Rheumatology
Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK
DISCLOSURES: KM declares she has no competing interests.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Paul Brogan and Dr Kirsty McLellan would like to gratefully acknowledge Professor Abraham Gedalia
and Dr James Krulisky, previous contributors to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: AG declares that he has no competing interests. JK declares that he is a paid consultant
for Axia Medical Solutions, a small skincare company from Carlsbad, CA.
// Peer Reviewers:
Michael Levin,
Professor of International Child Health
Imperial College London, London
DISCLOSURES: ML declares that he has no competing interests
Russell W. Steele, MD
Editor in Chief
Journal of Clinical Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Ochsner Children's
Health Center, New Orleans, LA
DISCLOSURES: RWS declares that he has no competing interests.
John L. Ey, MD
Clinical Professor of Pediatrics
Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health Science University, Portland, OR
DISCLOSURES: JLE declares that he has no competing interests.
David Burgner, BSc(Hons), MBChB, MRCP, MRCPCH, FRACP, DTMH, PhD
Principal Research Fellow
Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, The Royal Children’s Hospital, Victoria, Australia
DISCLOSURES: DB has received competitive research funding from the National Heart Foundation
Australia and from the Agency for Science, Technology and Research of the Singapore Government. He is
co-inventor on a patent related to diagnostics submitted through the Genome Institute of Singapore.
