# Neurally mediated reflex syncope

=== Page 1 ===
Neurally mediated
reflex syncope
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Dec 17, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Etiology  4
Pathophysiology  4
Classification  5
Case history  9
Diagnosis  10
Approach  10
History and exam  18
Risk factors  20
Tests  21
Differentials  26
Criteria  34
Management  36
Approach  36
Treatment algorithm overview  38
Treatment algorithm  39
Emerging  44
Secondary prevention  44
Patient discussions  44
Follow up  45
Monitoring  45
Complications  45
Prognosis  45
Guidelines  46
Diagnostic guidelines  46
Treatment guidelines  46
References  47
Images  57
Disclaimer  60
=== Page 3 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Overview
Summary
Neurally mediated reflex syncope (NMRS) refers to a group of related conditions or scenarios in which
symptomatic hypotension occurs as a result of neural reflex vasodilation and/or bradycardia.
Vasovagal syncope (VS) refers to a particular type of NMRS also known as the common faint.
VS has many manifestations and is generally considered to encompass faints triggered by emotional upset,
fear, and pain, as well as other less well-defined circumstances.
Patient education is the foundation of treatment for most NMRS syndromes, including VS.
Patients must be informed that, while reflex faints are almost never life-threatening, they tend to recur (often
in clusters), and injury can result if preventive measures are not taken seriously.
Strategies for reducing syncope recurrences in the long term comprise 1) physical techniques to improve
orthostatic tolerance, 2) pharmacologic interventions to prevent depletion of intravascular volume and/or
enhance arterial and venous tone, 3) cardiac pacing to avert bradycardia.
Definition
Syncope is a syndrome characterized by a relatively sudden, temporary, and self-terminating loss of
consciousness, associated with the inability to maintain postural tone, with rapid and spontaneous
recovery.[1] The causes vary widely from patient to patient, but they have a common underlying
pathophysiology.[2] [3] The transient loss of consciousness with syncope is the result of a temporary
inadequacy of cerebral nutrient flow, most often triggered by a fall in systemic arterial pressure below the
minimum needed to sustain cerebral blood flow. Neurally mediated reflex syncope (NMRS) refers to a group
of related conditions or scenarios in which symptomatic hypotension occurs as a result of neural reflex
vasodilation and/or bradycardia.[1] Vasovagal syncope (VS) refers to a particular type of NMRS also known
as the common faint.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
Syncope is estimated to account for approximately 1% of emergency department visits in the US and
Europe.[11] [12] [13] The estimated cumulative lifetime incidence of syncope is 35%.[14] It tends to peak in
frequency in young adults and then again in older people.[15]
Vasovagal syncope is the most common cause of syncope.[16] Most studies suggest that women (especially
younger women) are more susceptible to vasovagal faints, although reporting bias may play a role, as young
men may be less inclined to report such events.
The highest frequency of syncope is in patients with cardiovascular comorbidity and in older patients
ages >70 years.[17] [18] In older people, the quoted prevalence figures for syncope are probably an
underestimate, because historic features may be less clear-cut and up to 20% of these patients have
amnesia.
Etiology
Syncope has many possible causes, which are commonly categorized into three main groups: neurally
mediated reflex syncopal syndromes, orthostatic, or cardiovascular. However, even after a thorough
assessment, it may not be possible to assign a single cause for fainting. Patients often have multiple
comorbidities and as a consequence they may have several equally probable causes of fainting. For
example, while people with severe heart disease may experience transient tachyarrhythmias, high-grade
atrioventricular block, or even adverse effects from the use of multiple medications, they are also potential
candidates for vasovagal faints.[19]
NMRS syndromes include vasovagal faint (common faint), carotid sinus syncope, situational faint, and
glossopharyngeal and trigeminal neuralgia. These neurally mediated reflex faints, especially the vasovagal
faint, are the most common causes of syncope overall, and are particularly prevalent in people without
evidence of underlying heart disease or vascular disease.
In susceptible people, vasovagal syncope may be triggered by prolonged periods of upright posture, relative
dehydration, excessively warm closed-in environments, or extreme emotions. Common places for these
events are churches, restaurants, and long queues.
Pathophysiology
Transient insufficiency of global cerebral nutrient flow is the common thread underlying the mechanism
of all forms of syncope.[2] Thus, transient reduction of blood oxygen content (e.g., as in acute aircraft
decompression) may cause a faint. However, by far the most common etiology is diminished cerebral
perfusion resulting from a transient decrease in arterial blood pressure (BP), such as might occur at the
onset of a tachycardia or in conjunction with a prolonged pause in the cardiac rhythm. Loss of postural tone
is an inevitable consequence of loss of consciousness, and if the patient is not restrained, the person will
slump over or fall to the ground. Furthermore, on occasion, control of nonskeletal muscles may be affected,
resulting for instance in bladder (common) or bowel (rare) incontinence. Only later in the faint, as cerebral
oxygen deprivation reaches its most severe state, do jerky muscular movements occur in many (but not all)
patients who faint. These movements start after the loss of consciousness, are brief in duration, and are
erratic, thereby being distinguishable from the tonic-clonic movements of a classic epileptic seizure.
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Theory
In healthy young people, cerebral blood flow represents 12% to 15% of resting cardiac output. (i.e., 50 to 60
mL/100 g of brain tissue per minute).[20] [21] A flow of this magnitude readily meets the minimum oxygen
requirement to sustain consciousness (3.0 to 3.5 mL oxygen/100 g tissue per minute). However, the safety
factor for oxygen delivery may be lower in older people and those with diabetes mellitus or hypertension.[22]
A sudden cessation of cerebral blood flow for only 6 to 10 seconds is sufficient to cause complete loss of
consciousness. Further, experience with tilt-table testing has indicated that a sustained decrease in systolic
BP to ≤60 mmHg leads to syncope.
Cerebral blood flow is normally well autoregulated but, nevertheless, integrity of cerebral nutrient flow
depends on mechanisms that maintain systemic pressure. The most important of these are:
• Arterial baroreceptor-induced adjustments of systemic vascular resistance, cardiac contractility, and
heart rate
• Intravascular volume regulation, incorporating renal and hormonal influences to maintain central blood
volume
• Autonomic control over systemic BP
• Cerebrovascular autoregulation, which permits cerebral blood flow to be maintained over a relatively
wide range of perfusion pressures.
Transient failure of protective mechanisms, often aggravated by iatrogenic factors such as vasodilator
drugs, diuretics, or by medical issues such as dehydration or hemorrhage, may reduce systemic BP
below the autoregulatory range, and could induce a syncopal episode. Risk of failure of normal protective
compensatory mechanisms is greatest in patients who are older or ill and those with various forms of
autonomic failure.
Classification
Causes of syncope
Syncope has many possible causes, which are commonly categorized into three main groups: neurally
mediated reflex syncopal (NMRS) syndromes, orthostatic, or cardiovascular.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Theory
THEORY
Classification of syncope
From personal collection of Dr David Benditt; used with permission
NMRS syndromes
NMRS syndromes include vasovagal faint (common faint), carotid sinus syncope, situational faint, and
glossopharyngeal and trigeminal neuralgia.
Orthostatic syncope (postural or orthostatic intolerance syncope
syndromes)
Orthostatic (postural) faints are common, and are most often associated with movement from lying or sitting
to a standing position.
While orthostatic hypotension (OH) is not considered part of the NMRS, a neural component is a major
contributor to its pathophysiology; differentiating OH from NMRS in the clinic is a common problem.[2] [3] [4]
Cardiac arrhythmias as primary cause of syncope
Cardiac arrhythmias as the primary cause of syncope (i.e., those not secondary to neural-reflex events) are
less frequent than either neurally mediated reflex faints or OH.[2] However, they are an important differential
as they are often associated with a poorer prognosis.
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Theory
Ambulatory monitoring recording obtained during a spontaneous faint associated
with marked bradycardia. Baseline movement reflects the patient's distress
From personal collection of Dr David Benditt; used with permission
ECG trace revealing an episode of torsades de pointes in a
patient with recurrent faints and evident long-QT syndrome
From personal collection of Dr David Benditt; used with permission
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Theory
THEORY
Structural cardiac or cardiopulmonary disease
Structural cardiopulmonary diseases are relatively infrequent causes of faints compared with the neural-
reflex, orthostatic faints, or syncope due to arrhythmia.[2] [3] However, it is important to recognize faints
associated with structural heart disease or vascular disease because they warn of potentially life-threatening
conditions.[2] [5] [6]
Cerebrovascular disease and related conditions
Cerebrovascular disease is almost never the cause of a true faint, meaning loss of consciousness due to
cerebral hypoperfusion without focal neurologic deficit. In fact, transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) are the
opposite: focal deficit without loss of consciousness.[2] [7]
Subclavian steal is the best example in this class but is uncommon.[2] As a rule, this category should be
considered only after other causes have been eliminated.
Migraine-related syncope might also be included in this category. However, most syncope in patients with
migraine is vasovagal in origin, possibly triggered by pain.[2] [8] Syncope due to massive cerebrovascular
spasm appears to be very rare.
Syncope mimics and pseudosyncope
There are two important groups of conditions that may present with real or apparent transient loss of
consciousness (T-LOC) but that should not be regarded as syncope.[2] First of this group are conditions
that cause true T-LOC, but their mechanism differs from true syncope. Second are conditions in which
consciousness is never really lost, known as pseudosyncope.
Nonsyncope T-LOC includes:[2]
• Epilepsy (temporal lobe seizures are most commonly confused with syncope)
• Metabolic and endocrine disturbances
• Diabetic coma
• Hypoglycemia
• Hypercapnia.
Pseudosyncope is a relatively common problem that is unassociated with any change in heart rate or blood
pressure.[2] [3] As the name implies, true T-LOC does not occur in these cases, although the history from the
patient and witnesses may suggest that it had. The cause of pseudosyncope is most commonly psychiatric
and may include:[9]
• Generalized anxiety disorder
• Panic disorder
• Somatic symptom disorder
• Major depression
• Conversion disorders
• Factitious disorders
• Malingering.
Clinical experience suggests that many patients with pseudosyncope have a history of true syncope as well,
which can complicate management.[2] Medications used to treat psychiatric conditions (e.g., phenothiazines,
tricyclic and newer antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors) can also increase the risk of true
syncope by prolonging the QT interval and predisposing to torsades de pointes or hypotension.
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Theory
Drop attacks (sudden fall without loss of consciousness) also belong in the pseudosyncope group, as true
loss of consciousness does not occur.[2] [10]
Case history
Case history #1
An 18-year-old man presents to clinic reporting two episodes of loss of consciousness. The first episode
occurred 1 year earlier while playing dodgeball in gym class. He recalls diving to the ground to avoid
being hit. On getting up quickly, he noticed feeling lightheaded, sweaty, and nauseated. Apparently
he fell to the ground, but does not recall having done so. He later recalls waking up in the emergency
department. Witnesses reported shaking and clenching of both hands after he had fallen. In the
emergency department, he was given phenytoin intravenously because of concern that he may have
had a seizure. After a negative workup in the hospital, he was prescribed carbamazepine, despite no
abnormalities on an EEG. A year later, he had a second episode of loss of consciousness while doing
bicep curls. He denies palpitations, tongue biting, or incontinence. He experienced a similar prodrome of
warmth and lightheadedness. He has no history of seizures outside of these two episodes.
Case history #2
A 60-year-old man presents with syncope while walking outside with his wife. His wife recalls the patient
looking at the sky to point out an airplane. He then appeared pale and collapsed to the ground, suffering
a head laceration in the process. The history suggested the possibility of carotid sinus syndrome (CSS).
In the laboratory, carotid sinus massage was undertaken while the patient was in the upright posture on a
tilt table. The massage induced 10 seconds of asystole with near loss of consciousness. A dual-chamber
pacemaker was implanted on the basis of a presumptive diagnosis of CSS; there was no recurrence of
syncope during the next year. This patient has had no further faints but occasionally becomes dizzy when
turning his head abruptly.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Approach
The initial evaluation of patients with suspected syncope usually occurs in the emergency department or
acute-care clinic. After determining as far as possible that the patient has experienced true syncope, the
initial evaluation should then focus on the following key points:
• A detailed description of symptomatic events
• Ascertaining whether clinically important structural heart disease is present (with an ECG and often an
echocardiogram)
• Clinical features of the history that suggest a diagnosis.
In experienced hands, the cause of syncope can be established by a comprehensive medical history and
physical exam alone in approximately 60% of patients.[23] [24] However, up to one third of patients with
syncope have an undetermined cause after initial evaluation.[25] Further investigations are individualized so
that the workup is cost effective and appropriate.[1] Ultimately, the goal is to rule out more serious conditions
and efficiently establish the cause(s) of syncope with sufficient confidence.[19]
History and physical exam
The medical history is the most valuable tool in the initial syncope assessment. In some cases, the history
alone is diagnostic and no further testing is needed. The most common example is when the history is
indicative of a classic vasovagal faint or a situational neurally mediated reflex faint. However, in other
cases, the history may be unreliable, and patients (especially older adults) or witnesses may not be able
to remember details. Patients often have multiple comorbidities, and as a consequence they may have
several equally probable causes of fainting. If the history is suggestive but inconclusive, subsequent steps
in the evaluation can be focused, efficient, and cost effective.
Spend time eliciting all details of the event as best as possible. Look for patterns that may help narrow
the diagnosis: document the preceding circumstances, premonitory symptoms, and subsequent outcome,
and make careful note of comorbidities (e.g., diabetic neuropathy, autonomic dysfunction). A pre-prepared
patient questionnaire may help save time while acquiring the needed detail.
Although the focus of this topic is NMRS, always consider the possibility of other causes of syncope (e.g.,
orthostatic, cardiovascular). The American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association
(AHA)/Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) recommend the physical exam include orthostatic blood pressure
(BP) and heart rate changes in lying and sitting positions, on immediate standing, and after 3 minutes of
upright posture.[1] Perform a basic neurologic exam; sensory, motor, speech, or vision deficits suggest an
underlying neurologic problem requiring further investigation or referral.[1]
The diagnostic flow pathway illustrated (modified after that devised by the European Society of Cardiology
Syncope Guidelines Task Force) may prove helpful.[2]
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
Initial evaluation and further management strategy of syncope based on European Society
of Cardiology Task Force Guidelines. AECG, ambulatory ECG; CSM, carotid sinus massage;
EP, electrophysiologic; ILR, implantable loop recorder; SMU, syncope management unit
From personal collection of Dr David Benditt; used with permission
Rule out structural heart disease
Underlying structural heart disease is among the most important factors to identify in a patient with
suspected syncope. Obtain a 12-lead ECG in all patients to rule out atrioventricular (AV) block,
bradycardia, asystole, long QT, or a bundle branch block. An echocardiogram can also be useful.
However, do not order an echocardiogram for the routine evaluation of syncope unless cardiac etiology is
suspected as a result of the history, physical exam or ECG.[1] [26] The presence of heart disease is an
independent predictor of a cardiac cause for syncope (i.e., a primary arrhythmic cause or a cause based
on a structural cardiac abnormality leading to a transient hemodynamic disturbance), with a sensitivity
of 95% and a specificity of 45%; by contrast, the absence of heart disease excludes a cardiac cause of
syncope in 97% of the patients.[23]
Patients with structural abnormalities of the heart (such as left ventricular dysfunction) or ECG
abnormalities (such as a prolonged QT or QRS interval) should be referred for immediate further
evaluation.
Syncope in conjunction with exertion raises special concerns. In particular, if the faint occurs in "full flight,"
consider the possibility of structural and/or dynamic heart lesions that produce a relatively fixed cardiac
output in the setting of vascular dilation (e.g., severe aortic or mitral valvular stenosis, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy). However, syncope during or early after exercise (even moderate exertion such as
climbing stairs) can also occur in patients with severe autonomic dysfunction (e.g., pure autonomic failure)
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
in whom vascular control is unable to maintain adequate cerebral perfusion pressure. On rare occasions
syncope accompanying exertion may occur as a consequence of a neurally mediated reflex faint (i.e.,
postexertional variant of vasovagal faint); however, in these cases the faint typically occurs shortly after
completion of, not during, the exercise.
Risk stratification
Assesses whether further hospital evaluation and treatment is necessary, establishes urgency, and
estimates prognosis.[2] [27]
The ACC/AHA/HRS guideline recommends evaluating short-term risk related to syncope (necessary
for immediate decision making in the acute setting) as well as long-term adverse events (most likely
associated with underlying medical conditions, many of which are cardiac).[1] The use of risk stratification
scores may be reasonable.[1] However, the key determinant for further hospital evaluation and treatment
is the presence of a serious medical condition potentially relevant to the cause of syncope.[1]
Serious medical conditions that may require further hospital evaluation and treatment include:
• Cardiac arrhythmic conditions
• Cardiac or vascular nonarrhythmic conditions
• Noncardiac conditions (e.g., gastrointestinal bleeding or severe anemia).
Patients with documented severe bradyarrhythmias, ventricular tachycardia, acute aortic dissection,
abrupt hemorrhage, or pulmonary embolism should be admitted. Similarly, it is prudent to admit patients
with moderate to severe left ventricular dysfunction (e.g., ejection fraction ≤35%), valvular disease of
clinical concern, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
One study found a high prevalence of pulmonary embolism among patients hospitalized for their first
episode of syncope (approximately 1 in 6 patients); this may be important to consider in patients without
an alternative explanation, but further research is required.[28]
Where a serious medical condition is absent, it is reasonable to manage presumptive reflex-mediated
syncope in the outpatient setting.[1]
Rules and criteria that may help to risk stratify patients presenting to the emergency department include:
the San Francisco Syncope Rule (SFSR), the Canadian Risk Syncope Score (CSRS), the Osservatorio
Epidemiologico sulla Sincope nel Lazio (OESIL) score, the Evaluation of Guidelines in Syncope Study
(EGSYS) score, and the Risk Stratification of Syncope in the Emergency Department (ROSE) study.[29]
[30] [31] [32] [33] The two most commonly used criteria are the SFSR and the ROSE study.
The SFSR has been implemented and validated in many emergency departments across the US and can
be remembered using the mnemonic "CHESS":[29]
• Congestive heart failure (CHF)
• Hematocrit <30%
• ECG abnormal
• Shortness of breath
• Systolic BP <90 mm Hg.
The newer ROSE study includes B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) as part of the decision criteria and can
be remembered using the mnemonic "BRACES":[30]
• BNP level ≥300 picograms/mL
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
• Bradycardia ≤50 in emergency department or pre-hospital
• Rectal exam positive for fecal occult blood
• Anemia (Hb ≤90 g/L)
• Chest pain associated with syncope
• ECG showing Q-waves (but not in lead III)
• Saturation ≤94% on room air.
Other initial investigations
Consider targeted blood tests to rule out other causes of syncope, including:
• Cortisol (to evaluate adrenal insufficiency)
• BUN and creatinine (to evaluate for dehydration)
• Hemoglobin (to rule out anemia)
• Blood glucose (to rule out hypoglycemia)
• Beta-hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin; to rule out pregnancy)
• Cardiac enzymes (to rule out myocardial infarction)
• D-dimer (to rule out pulmonary embolism) and/or CT pulmonary angiogram.
Guidelines recommend against broad testing; only order investigations relevant to the clinical
situation.[27] [34]
Patients with recurrent syncope, or those who have experienced trauma due to syncope, warrant further
evaluation with an ambulatory ECG monitor (i.e., Holter monitor), loop, or event monitor, or possibly tilt
table testing. Noncardiovascular causes can be examined through appropriate blood tests (e.g., glucose,
cortisol), electroencephalogram (EEG), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, or autonomic
testing. However, do not routinely order EEG as part of initial syncope assessment.[1] [35][36] This is
because EEG will be negative in a large portion of patients with epilepsy, and may be positive in patients
without epilepsy. False positive EEG findings commonly lead to unnecessary use of antiepileptic drugs
and may delay the syncope diagnosis and treatment. EEGs are most helpful in specific situations when
there is high pre-test probability for epilepsy based on history and exam, and clinical presentation.[36]
Neurologic imaging (MRI, CT) may be indicated if significant head trauma is suspected or there are
findings that support further evaluation (e.g., symptoms of stroke); but do not routinely order CT or MRI in
patients with syncope in absence of neurologic findings.[1] [37] CT and MRI rarely establish a diagnosis in
patients with syncope and are expensive. CT scans may unnecessarily expose patients to radiation.
Do not perform imaging of the carotid arteries for simple syncope without other neurologic symptoms.
Occlusive carotid artery disease does not cause fainting but rather causes focal neurologic deficits such
as unilateral weakness. Therefore, carotid artery imaging will not identify the cause of the fainting in cases
of simple syncope.[1] [38]
Vasovagal syncope
Establishing the diagnosis of vasovagal faint relies heavily on obtaining a detailed medical history,
including eyewitness accounts.
Classic features that suggest vasovagal syncope include:
• Triggering factors:
• Unpleasant sights
• Pain from physical injury
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
• Fatigue
• Palpitations or bradycardia (consistent with but not diagnostic of vasovagal syncope)
• Emotional stress (especially in warm, crowded environments)
• Prolonged standing
• Dehydration
• Vigorous exercise (if syncope occurs post exercise)
• Warning (prodromal) symptoms:
• Feeling hot or cold
• Sweating
• Tachycardia (consistent with but not diagnostic of vasovagal syncope)
• Shortness of breath
• Loss of hearing or vision
• Nausea
• Change in breathing pattern
• Physical signs reported by witnesses:
• Marked pallor (white as a ghost, death-like)
• Clammy skin
• Confusion.
Recovery is typically rapid after a vasovagal faint if the patient remains recumbent, but a subsequent
period of fatigue is common.
However, the classic features of vasovagal faint are often absent, only incompletely present, or not
recollected (especially in older people). Patients may also experience symptoms (e.g., erratic muscle
movements while unconscious, urinary or rarely bowel incontinence) that can result in confusion with
seizure disorders and necessitate a neurologic consultation. Family history of sudden death should trigger
concern about other diagnoses (e.g., structural heart disease, long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome).
Perform additional tests when the history alone is unclear. Head-up tilt-table testing is the most common
confirmatory test for vasovagal syncope.[39] [40] [41] [42] [43]
Other NMRSs
These include carotid sinus syncope, situational faint, and glossopharyngeal and trigeminal neuralgia.
In carotid sinus syndrome (CSS), there is a history of accidental manipulation of the neck that results in
external pressure on the carotid sinus baroreceptors. There are three types of CSS: bradycardic CSS,
dominant vasodepressor CSS (predominant sign is a relative hypotension), or mixed (bradycardia and
hypotension). Deliberate diagnostic carotid sinus massage (CSM) applied by a suitably experienced
physician may reproduce symptoms and confirm the diagnosis in patients with CSS.[22] [44] ECG in
these cases will show CSS bradycardia.
Situational syncope can be triggered by acute hemorrhage, a cough, a sneeze, gastrointestinal
stimulation (swallow, defecation, visceral pain), micturition, post exercise, or other situations including
brass instrument playing, weightlifting, or eating a meal (postprandial). Diagnosing situational syncope
relies on the history; it is not easily assessed in the laboratory. Cough syncope may be an exception, but
diagnostic criteria for hemodynamic response to induced cough have yet to be determined.
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is an unusual pain syndrome associated with syncope. The hallmarks of this
syndrome are episodic sensations of usually left-sided pharyngeal pain that frequently result in syncope.
The pathogenesis relating the pain and syncope is unclear but is thought to be due to connections
between the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves.[45]
Trigeminal neuralgia is a somewhat more common facial pain syndrome presenting with pain at one of
the divisions of the trigeminal nerve. However, syncope resulting from trigeminal neuralgia is unusual and
the pathogenesis is unclear. Trigeminal neuralgia has been associated with syncope, seizures, and even
cardiac arrest.[46]
Laboratory studies: basic autonomic assessment
1. Head-up tilt-table testing (HUT)
The HUT is a widely available and well studied diagnostic tool that can unmask susceptibility to vasovagal
syncope.[4] [22] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] It is indicated when vasovagal syncope is suspected but the clinical
history is equivocal. If the history is classic, HUT is not necessary. The most common test protocols are:
HUT with nitroglycerin; HUT with isoproterenol; or drug-free HUT. The drugs may be used to increase
susceptibility to the test.[47]
Detailed discussion of tilt-table testing protocols can be found in the ACC expert consensus report and
guideline documents from the European Society of Cardiology and the ACC/AHA/HRS.[1] [2] [39] In brief,
the first step is passive head-up tilt at 60° to 70°, during which the patient is supported by a footplate and
gently applied body straps, for 20-45 minutes (protocols vary). If needed, tilt testing is repeated with a
drug challenge. Until recently, the most frequently used provocative drug was isoproterenol, usually given
in escalating doses. However, intravenous or sublingual nitroglycerin has gained favor, in part because it
expedites the procedure without adversely affecting diagnostic use.[48] The so-called Italian protocol, in
which a 20-minute passive tilt is followed if necessary by sublingual nitroglycerin, has become the most
popular protocol.
An important clinical attribute of HUT is that it provides the opportunity to precipitate a typical vasovagal
attack in the presence of the physician. This enhances the patient's confidence in the diagnosis. A
positive test can also help patients learn to recognize symptoms and prevent an impending faint.
Tilt-table testing without pharmacologic provocation exhibits a sensitivity of 37% and specificity of 99%;
with pharmacologic provocation (nitroglycerin administration), the sensitivity is 66% and the specificity is
89%.[48] Nonetheless, HUT is imperfect and there is controversy regarding its optimal use. The false-
positive rate is approximately 10%.[2] Acute reproducibility, in terms of whether syncope is induced, is
80% to 90%. Longer-term reproducibility (i.e., >1 year) is about 60%.[49] Experience of the practitioner
can be a major limitation.
Another major weakness of HUT is that it does not always result in the same hemodynamic picture
when repeated in the same patient, and thus is not appropriate for directing treatment strategy. A
cardioinhibitory picture (i.e., bradycardia) may predominate on one occasion, whereas vasodepressor
responses (vasodilation being principally responsible for the hypotension) may occur at other times.[7]
[50] [51] In the International Study of Syncope of Unknown Etiology (ISSUE) study, even when tilt testing
indicated a prominent vasodilatory component to the faint, the subsequent recording of spontaneous
faints by an implantable loop recorder often revealed bradycardic events.[7] Further study of this
phenomenon with devices that can monitor systemic BP, or a surrogate of BP, as well as heart rate is
needed.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
A positive tilt-table test (especially if it reproduces the patient's spontaneous symptoms) can be
considered diagnostic for patients without severe structural heart disease, and no further tests are
needed. However, for patients with significant structural heart disease, cardiac arrhythmias and iatrogenic
factors (e.g., drug effects) should be excluded before relying on a positive tilt-test result.[48]
2. Carotid sinus massage (CSM)
Pressure at the site where the common carotid artery bifurcates produces a reflex slowing in heart rate
and decrease in BP. This observation is the basis of the technique of CSM.
CSM is used to diagnose CSS in patients with a history of syncope. However, CSM can be positive
in some people with no history of syncope (up to 40% of older adults); this is known as carotid sinus
hypersensitivity.[2] Requiring reproduction of symptoms increases the specificity of CSM: in a study of
1855 patients with unexplained syncope, 24% demonstrated carotid sinus hypersensitivity, but only about
one third of these (8.8%) had CSS when symptoms were required to make the diagnosis.[52]
Consensus opinion is that CSS may be diagnosed when CSM reproduces symptoms as a result of ≥1
of the following being induced: >3 seconds of asystole, paroxysmal atrioventricular (AV) block, a marked
decrease in systemic arterial pressure (usually a drop in systolic BP ≥50 mmHg), or a combination of
these.[1] [2] [35] CSM should be performed in both upright and supine positions, with pressure applied for
5 seconds in each position.[1] The European Society of Cardiology recommends applying pressure for 10
seconds to allow time for symptoms to develop.[35]
The most convincing results from CSM are obtained when it is undertaken with the patient in the upright
position, because the impact of gravity exaggerates the hemodynamic effects of induced bradycardia or
vasodilation. The diagnosis may be missed in about one third of cases if only supine CSM is performed.
Arterial pressure and ECG should be recorded throughout. For measurement of arterial pressure, a
noninvasive BP measurement device may be suitable, but satisfactory recordings are often difficult to
obtain. A conventional sphygmomanometer is not appropriate.
CSM should not be performed in patients who have experienced transient ischemic attack or stroke within
the past 3 months or in patients with carotid bruits (unless carotid Doppler studies convincingly exclude
significant carotid artery narrowing).[2]
On a rare occasion CSM may elicit self-limited atrial fibrillation of little clinical significance. Finally, findings
recorded in the period after an acute myocardial infarction may not be representative and should not be
used to make a diagnosis of CSS.
3. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) test
The value of bolus administration of ATP remains controversial.[2] The ATP test may be useful to identify
a form of syncope associated with neurally mediated paroxysmal AV block in certain older people in
whom other causes have been excluded, and may guide a decision to initiate permanent pacing by
unmasking occult AV nodal disease in susceptible people.[1] The diagnostic and predictive value of the
test remains to be confirmed by prospective studies. In the absence of sufficient data, the test may be
considered at the end of the diagnostic workup. 
The most thoroughly tested protocol involves injection of a 20-mg bolus of ATP into a brachial vein in
a supine patient who is undergoing continuous ECG monitoring.[53] BP is monitored noninvasively.
The outcome of the test (positive or negative) depends on the duration of the ATP-induced cardiac
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
pause. A pause >10 seconds, even if interrupted by escape beats, is defined as abnormal. Some reports
suggest that a pause >6 seconds is sufficient to declare the test abnormal.[54] For patients with abnormal
responses, reproducibility is approximately 80% both in the short and the long term.
Because of the possibility of bronchospastic reactions, the ATP test is contraindicated in patients with
known asthma.
4. Insertable loop recorder
An insertable loop recorder can be used to rule out brady- or tachyarrhythmia if events are relatively
infrequent (<1 or 2 per month) and an arrhythmia is suspected.[27]
5. Electrophysiologic study
Electrophysiologic study is infrequently indicated.[1] It may be used if structural heart disease is present
and a tachyarrhythmia is suspected, and in patients who may be experiencing intermittent high-grade
conduction block. It is also warranted if there is suspicion of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia as
the cause of symptoms, especially if the patient describes palpitations prior to syncope.
Miscellaneous autonomic system tests
1. Valsalva maneuver
The Valsalva maneuver is used to assess the integrity of the arterial baroreceptor reflex arc and may
indicate the presence of autonomic failure that can cause syncope through orthostatic hypotension.[2] In
itself, however, the Valsalva maneuver does not directly implicate a mechanism for syncope. The Valsalva
response is typically tested under continuous ECG and BP monitoring in addition to monitoring the patient
for clinical symptoms.
2. Active standing test
As its name implies, the active standing test assesses a patient's response to active movement from
supine to upright posture. It can be considered to rule out orthostatic hypotension.[55]
Active muscle movement is expected to propel more blood toward the central circulation to provide the
increase in cardiac output required for upright posture. However, active use of leg muscles may also
aggravate peripheral vascular dilation and, as a result, induce greater hypotension. The balance between
these effects determines the net effect on systemic BP.
A 3-minute active standing test is useful to assess initial orthostatic hypotension (first 30 seconds of
upright posture).[2] The initial hypotension occurs on active standing but not on tilting. To detect the
pressure decrease, beat-to-beat pressure monitoring (usually noninvasive) is essential. A ≥3-minute
period of active standing may also demonstrate later diminution of BP indicative of classic orthostatic
hypotension (delayed orthostatic hypotension).[1] [35]
3. Cold pressor test
The cold pressor test is performed by immersing the hand into a container of ice-cold water, usually for
1 minute. Any changes in blood pressure and heart rate are recorded. Like the Valsalva maneuver, this
test provides insight into the integrity of the autonomic reflex. It has not been used to identify a specific
diagnosis.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
4. Cough test
Induced cough may help assess susceptibility to cough (tussive) syncope, but few data are available.[56]
Like CSM, it may be best undertaken with the patient in the upright posture. Diagnostic criteria for
hemodynamic response to induced cough have yet to be determined.
History and exam
Other diagnostic factors
history of recurrent faints (common)
• Patients with NMRS often have a many-year history of recurrent faints, especially beginning before the
age of 40 years.[2]
absence of structural heart disease (common)
• The presence of heart disease is an independent predictor of a cardiac cause for syncope (i.e., a
primary arrhythmic cause or a cause based on a structural cardiac abnormality leading to a transient
hemodynamic disturbance), with a sensitivity of 95% and a specificity of 45%; by contrast, the
absence of heart disease excludes a cardiac cause of syncope in 97% of the patients.[23]
provocative factor (common)
• In vasovagal syncope provocative factors include: unpleasant sights, pain from physical injury, fatigue,
palpitations or bradycardia (consistent with but not diagnostic of vasovagal syncope), emotional stress,
prolonged standing, dehydration, vigorous exercise (if syncope occurs post exercise).
• In carotid sinus syndrome, there is a history of accidental manipulation of the neck that results in
external pressure on the carotid sinus baroreceptors. Accidental manipulation of the neck can be as
simple as a tight shirt collar or tie.
• Situational syncope can be triggered by acute hemorrhage, a cough, a sneeze, gastrointestinal
stimulation (swallow, defecation, visceral pain), micturition, post exercise, or other situations including
brass instrument playing, weightlifting, or eating a meal (postprandial).
nausea (common)
• A common premonitory symptom possibly of central nervous system origin, but also may be due to
splanchnic bed venous dilation.
low risk for adverse outcomes (common)
• Patients with symptoms strongly suggestive of vasovagal, situational, or orthostatic faints (excluding
perhaps older people with excessive injury risk) are considered low risk. After initial emergency room
assessment for syncope in the absence of evidence for structural heart disease, they can be referred
for outpatient evaluation (preferably to a syncope clinic).
lightheadedness (common)
• A nonspecific complaint suggesting a foggy sensation in the head. This may reflect some diminution
of cerebral blood flow but not sufficient to cause a syncope. It is also a complaint that may have no
relevance to syncope, being a common symptom particularly in older people. Lightheadedness occurs
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
in many conditions and may not prove helpful. In addition it tends to mean different things to different
people.
pallor (common)
• Characteristic of vasovagal faints; its absence should therefore make one question the diagnosis.
However, the finding tends to be more apparent in white people and is less helpful in people with dark
skin.
diaphoresis (common)
• The sensation of feeling sweaty and experiencing a coldness and/or clammy sensation is
characteristic of vasovagal and closely related situational faints.
diminished vision or hearing (common)
• These are often early symptoms and, while not diagnostic of vasovagal syncope per se, they are
essential in order to consider that the patient's spell was indeed a true faint.
• Typically, these symptoms occur immediately preceding (prodromal) or during a syncopal episode and
are transient in nature.
physical injury (common)
• Pain of an injury may induce a vasovagal faint. In addition, signs of a traumatic injury (e.g., head
laceration) may indicate true syncope rather than near-syncope.
fatigue after episode (common)
• The presence of fatigue or tiredness after recovery from the event is an important clue to a vasovagal
cause.
palpitations (common)
• Although slow (or relatively slow) heart rates are thought to be most characteristic of vasovagal events,
the episodes typically begin with an early phase of sinus tachycardia. Consequently, palpitations at
an early stage before collapse are common. Palpitations may occur before collapse in patients with
tachyarrhythmia-induced faints as well. Thus, palpitations are consistent with, but not diagnostic of,
vasovagal syncope.
bradycardia (common)
• Slow heart rates are a common finding at the time of vasovagal syncope. At times the bradycardia
may be dramatic (e.g., pauses of 5-25 seconds or longer), whereas at other times the heart rate
may seem reasonable but is in fact much slower than appropriate for the degree of hypotension
(i.e., predominantly vasodepressor form of vasovagal syncope). Bradycardia is common in neurally
mediated reflex vasovagal syncope but may also indicate conduction system disease or excess drug
effects.
absence of family history of sudden death (common)
• Vasovagal syncope is not usually associated with sudden death. Family history of sudden death
should trigger concern about other diagnoses (e.g., structural heart disease, long QT syndrome,
Brugada syndrome).
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
neuralgia (uncommon)
• Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is an unusual pain syndrome associated with syncope. The hallmarks of
this syndrome are episodic sensations of usually left-sided pharyngeal pain that frequently result in
syncope.[45]
• Trigeminal neuralgia is a somewhat more common facial pain syndrome presenting with pain at one of
the divisions of the trigeminal nerve. However, syncope resulting from trigeminal neuralgia is unusual
and the pathogenesis is unclear.[46]
Risk factors
Strong
prior syncope
• Patients with NMRS often have a many-year history of recurrent faints, especially beginning before the
age of 40 years.[2]
prior history of arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, heart failure, or
cardiomyopathy
• Patients with a known history of symptomatic bradycardiac and ventricular tachyarrhythmias,
myocardial infarction, heart failure, or cardiomyopathy are at elevated risk for syncope.
severe aortic stenosis
• Patients with severe aortic stenosis (with a large pressure gradient) are likely to be at an increased risk
of syncope.
Weak
prolonged standing
• Associated with neurally mediated types of syncope.
emotional stress (especially in a warm, crowded environment)
• Associated with neurally mediated types of syncope.
dehydration/hypovolemia
• Associated with neurally mediated types and orthostatic syncope.
preceding episode of nausea and/or vomiting
• Associated with neurally mediated types of syncope.
preceding episode of severe pain
• Associated with neurally mediated types of syncope.
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
12-lead ECG
• Should be obtained in all patients.
• Patients with recurrent syncope, or those who have experienced
trauma due to syncope, warrant further evaluation with an ambulatory
ECG monitor (i.e., Holter monitor).
rules out atrioventricular
block, bradycardia,
asystole, long QT, bundle
branch block
serum hemoglobin
• Obtained to rule out syncope caused by anemia.
normal; low in anemia
plasma blood glucose
• Obtained to rule out syncope caused by hypoglycemia.
normal; low in
hypoglycemia
serum beta-hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin)
• Obtained to rule out syncope caused by pregnancy.
negative; positive in
pregnancy
cardiac enzymes
• Obtained to rule out myocardial infarction if there is clinical suspicion.
normal; elevated in
myocardial infarction
D-dimer level
• Obtained to rule out pulmonary embolism if there is clinical suspicion.
normal; elevated in
pulmonary embolism
serum cortisol
• Obtained to rule out syncope caused by adrenal insufficiency.
normal or decreased
BUN and serum creatinine
• Obtained to rule out syncope caused by dehydration.
normal or elevated
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test to avoid
Recommendations Rationale
electroencephalogram (EEG)
• Do not routinely order EEG as part of initial syncope work-up in the
absence of neurological features suggestive of a seizure.[1] [2] [36]
• EEG will be negative
in a large portion
of patients with
epilepsy, and may be
positive in patients
without epilepsy.
False positive EEG
findings commonly
lead to unnecessary
use of antiepileptic
drugs and may delay
the syncope diagnosis
and treatment. EEGs
are most helpful in
specific situations
when there is high
pre-test probability
for epilepsy based
on history and
exam, and clinical
presentation.[36]
carotid artery imaging
• Do not perform imaging of the carotid arteries for syncope without
focal neurologic findings.[1] [38]
• Occlusive carotid
artery disease does
not cause fainting
but rather causes
focal neurologic
deficits such as
unilateral weakness.
Therefore, carotid
artery imaging will not
identify the cause of
the fainting in cases
of syncope without
focal neurological
findings.[1] [38]
neurologic imaging (CT, MRI)
• Do not routinely order CT or MRI in patients with syncope in absence
of neurological findings.[1] [37] Neurological imaging may be
indicated if significant head trauma is suspected or there are findings
that support further evaluation (e.g., symptoms of stroke).
• CT and MRI rarely
establish a diagnosis
in patients with
syncope and are
expensive. CT scans
may unnecessarily
expose patients to
radiation.[1] [37]
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
Other tests to consider
Test Result
echocardiogram
• Should be obtained if there is any concern that structural heart
disease is present or needs to be excluded. Do not order an
echocardiogram for the routine evaluation of syncope unless cardiac
etiology is suspected as a result of the history, physical exam or
ECG.[1] [26]
rules out hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, aortic
stenosis, poor ventricular
function
tilt-table test
• Used only if there is suspicion of vasovagal syncope (VS) but the
medical history is not convincing on its own. May be used to teach
patients about premonitory symptoms in VS syndrome or to assure a
patient that the physician has had an opportunity to witness an event.
• Detailed discussion of tilt-table testing protocols can be found in the
American College of Cardiology (ACC) expert consensus report and
guideline documents from the European Society of Cardiology and
the ACC/American Heart Association/Heart Rhythm Society.[1] [2]
[39]
• The first step is passive head-up tilt at 60° to 70°, during which the
patient is supported by a footplate and gently applied body straps, for
20-45 minutes (protocols vary).
• If needed, tilt testing is repeated with a drug challenge. Until recently,
the most frequently used provocative drug was isoproterenol usually
given in escalating doses. However, intravenous or sublingual
nitroglycerin has gained favor, in part because it expedites the
procedure without adversely affecting diagnostic use.
• The so-called Italian protocol, in which a 20-minute passive tilt is
followed if necessary by sublingual nitroglycerin, has become the
most popular protocol as a result of its relatively short duration with
well-preserved specificity and sensitivity.
reproduction of
symptoms/syncope,
bradycardia, hypotension
carotid sinus massage (CSM)
• Used to diagnose carotid sinus syndrome (CSS) in patients with a
history of syncope.
• CSS may be diagnosed when CSM reproduces symptoms as a
result of ≥1 of the following being induced: >3 seconds of asystole,
paroxysmal atrioventricular (AV) block, a marked decrease in
systemic arterial pressure (usually a drop in systolic BP ≥50 mmHg),
or a combination of these.[1] [2] [35] CSM should be performed
in both upright and supine positions, with pressure applied for 5
seconds in each position.[1] The European Society of Cardiology
recommends applying pressure for 10 seconds to allow time for
symptoms to develop.[35]
• Abnormal responses can also be frequently observed in patients
without syncope. The diagnosis may be missed in about one third of
cases if only supine CSM is performed.
• CSM should not be performed in patients who have experienced
transient ischemic attack or stroke within the past 3 months or
in patients with carotid bruits (unless carotid Doppler studies
convincingly exclude significant carotid artery narrowing).[2]
reproduction of
symptoms and at least
one of the following:
>3 seconds of asystole,
paroxysmal AV block,
or a marked decrease in
systemic arterial pressure
(usually a drop in systolic
BP ≥50 mmHg)
insertable loop recorder
• Used if events are relatively infrequent (<1 or 2 per month) and an
arrhythmia is suspected.
rules out brady- or
tachyarrhythmia
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
electrophysiologic study
• Infrequently indicated.[1] May be used if structural heart disease
is present and a tachyarrhythmia is suspected or in patients who
may be experiencing intermittent high-grade conduction block. It is
also warranted if there is suspicion of paroxysmal supraventricular
tachycardia as the cause of symptoms, especially if the patient
describes palpitations prior to syncope.
rules out long sinus node
recovery time, infrahisian
conduction disease,
inducible ventricular
tachycardia
Valsalva maneuver
• The Valsalva maneuver is used to assess the integrity of the arterial
baroreceptor reflex arc and may indicate the presence of autonomic
failure that can cause syncope through orthostatic hypotension.[2] In
itself, however, the Valsalva maneuver does not directly implicate a
mechanism for syncope.
• The Valsalva response is typically tested under continuous ECG
and BP monitoring in addition to monitoring the patient for clinical
symptoms.
normal in NMRS; may
indicate the presence of
autonomic failure that can
cause syncope through
orthostatic hypotension
active standing test
• The active standing test assesses patient response to active
movement from supine to upright posture. Active muscle movement
is expected to propel more blood toward the central circulation to
provide the increase in cardiac output required for upright posture.
The initial hypotension occurs on active standing but not on tilting.
To detect the pressure decrease, beat-to-beat pressure monitoring
(usually noninvasive) is essential. A ≥3-minute period of active
upright standing may also demonstrate later diminution of BP
indicative of classic orthostatic hypotension (delayed orthostatic
hypotension).[1] [35]
to rule out orthostatic
hypotension
cold pressor test
• The cold pressor test is performed by immersing the hand into a
container of ice-cold water, usually for 1 minute. Any changes in
blood pressure and heart rate are recorded. It has not been used to
identify a specific diagnosis.
may provide insight into
autonomic reflex integrity
cough test
• Induced cough may help assess susceptibility to cough (tussive)
syncope, but few data are available.[56] Like carotid sinus massage,
it may be best undertaken with the patient in the upright posture.
• Diagnostic criteria for hemodynamic response to induced cough have
yet to be determined.
to rule out susceptibility
to cough syncope
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
Emerging tests
Test Result
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) test
• The value of bolus administration of ATP remains controversial.[2]
The ATP test may be useful to identify a form of syncope associated
with neurally mediated paroxysmal atrioventricular (AV) block in
certain older people in whom other causes have been excluded, and
may guide a decision to initiate permanent pacing by unmasking
occult AV nodal disease in susceptible people.[1] The diagnostic and
predictive value of the test remains to be confirmed by prospective
studies. In the absence of sufficient data, the test may be considered
at the end of the diagnostic workup.
• The most thoroughly tested protocol involves injection of a 20-
mg bolus of ATP into a brachial vein in a supine patient who is
undergoing continuous ECG monitoring.[53] BP is monitored
noninvasively.
• The outcome of the test (positive or negative) depends on the
duration of the ATP-induced cardiac pause. A pause >10 seconds,
even if interrupted by escape beats, is defined as abnormal. Some
reports suggest that a pause >6 seconds is sufficient to declare
the test abnormal.[54] For patients with abnormal responses,
reproducibility is approximately 80% both in the short and the long
term.
• Because of the possibility of bronchospastic reactions, the ATP test is
contraindicated in patients with known asthma.
identifies form of syncope
associated with presumed
neurally mediated
paroxysmal AV block in
certain older people
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Orthostatic syncope
(postural or orthostatic
intolerance syncope
syndromes)
• History of fainting with
concomitant dehydration,
antihypertensive medication
or vasodilator use, people
who are older, frail, or
have underlying conditions
associated with autonomic
failure.
• Symptoms that are
reproduced with carotid
sinus massage (CSM)
are not consistent with
orthostatic syncope.
• Orthostatic BP
measurement: a fall in BP
(usually >50 mmHg systolic),
associated with symptoms
of syncope or near-syncope.
The patient may exhibit the
hypotension immediately
after standing or it may
evolve over the subsequent
3-5 minutes of upright
quiet posture. Notably,
this observation may not
be reliably reproduced,
especially in older people.
Repeated or 24-hour
ambulatory measurements
may be necessary to
elucidate this diagnosis.
• Tilt-table test: hypotension
on standing.
Bradycardia • Syncope is possible with
long sinoatrial nodal pauses
or very slow heart rates.
• Occurs owing to
bradycardia-induced cerebral
hypoperfusion, especially in
the setting of left ventricular
(LV) dysfunction.
• Common in patients with
complete heart block and a
very slow ventricular escape
rhythm with LV dysfunction,
and in patients with second-
degree atrioventricular (AV)
block.
• ECG: may show sinus
bradycardia with or without
sinus arrhythmia, AV block
with junctional or ventricular
escape, His-Purkinje system
disease, bradycardia, and
AV block in a setting of
myocardial infarction; deep
T-wave inversions across the
precordium indicative of a
neurologic event may occur
in conjunction with sinus
bradycardia.
• Electrophysiologic testing:
may be helpful in some
cases but the findings
are usually nonspecific.
It may show quantitative
measurement of sinus node,
AV node, or His-Purkinje
system dysfunction.
Bradycardia: AV
conduction disorders
• Paroxysmal or persistent
atrioventricular (AV)
block can cause severe
bradycardia and thereby lead
to syncope.
• ECG: patient may have
Mobitz type II second-degree
AV block, third-degree AV
block, or alternating left and
right bundle branch block;
other observations that
suggest an AV conduction
disorder as the cause of
syncope, but are at best
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
considered to be only
indirect evidence, include
1) bifascicular block (left
bundle branch block, right
bundle branch block with
left anterior or left posterior
fascicular block), 2) Mobitz
type I second-degree AV
block in older people (usually
defined as >70 years old).
• Mobile cardiac outpatient
telemetry: provides long-term
ECG monitoring and thereby
increases the chance of
detecting ECG abnormality
(i.e., AV block, possibly
transient) if an arrhythmia is
the cause of symptoms.
• Implantable loop recording:
shows evidence of AV block.
• Electrophysiologic (EP)
testing: in the absence of a
direct symptom-arrhythmia
correlation, a tentative
diagnosis can be made in
case of ventricular pauses
>3 seconds in duration
when the patient is awake
or if Mobitz type II second-
degree or third-degree (i.e.,
complete or high-grade)
AV block is discovered. In
the setting of nothing more
than bifascicular block or
nonspecific intraventricular
conduction delay, invasive
EP study may be helpful.
On the other hand, these
patients often also have
underlying structural heart
disease, so it is equally
important to look for both the
conduction abnormalities
and susceptibility to
tachyarrhythmias.
Supraventricular
tachycardias
• Very rapid heart rates;
infrequently causes a
sufficient period of prolonged
hypotension to cause
syncope. Patients may
complain of near-syncope.
• Associated with reduced
circulating volume status
(i.e., relative dehydration),
upright posture, presence
• ECG: shows heart rate
variability and microvolt T-
wave alternans.
• Holter monitoring,
loop-recording, or
electrophysiologic studies:
may demonstrate findings
of supraventricular
tachycardias.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
of structural heart disease
(especially with diminished
ejection fraction or significant
valvular or other outflow
obstruction), and abnormal
reflexes of the peripheral
vasculature.
Ventricular tachycardia
(VT)
• Usually occurs in setting
of ischemic heart
disease, valvular heart
disease, or certain dilated
cardiomyopathies that
may result in symptomatic
hypotension; VT in
obstructive cardiomyopathies
and arrhythmogenic right-
ventricular dysplasia may
cause syncope; torsades de
pointes VT is a characteristic
feature of the long QT
syndromes, arrhythmia may
be very fast and often is self-
terminating.
• ECG: shows wide QRS
complex (≥120 milliseconds),
rate >120 bpm lasting for
≥3 beats, spontaneously
resolving in <30 seconds.
• Echocardiogram: shows
compromised left ventricular
function, evidence of
structural heart disease, or
hypertrophic or idiopathic
cardiomyopathy.
Nonsustained VT (NSVT) • NSVT is a common
finding during evaluation
of syncope (whether by
Holter or extended-duration
ambulatory ECG monitoring)
but is diagnostically a much
less specific finding than
sustained VT.
• ECG: shows wide QRS
complex (≥120 milliseconds),
rate >120 bpm lasting for
≥3 beats, spontaneously
resolving in <30 seconds.
• Echocardiogram: absence of
structural cardiac disease.
• The isolated presence of
NSVT, particularly in the
absence of evident structural
cardiac disease or ECG
evidence of a channelopathy,
should not be considered
a causative diagnosis.
However, if hypotension
occurs with NSVT during
electrophysiologic study, or
if monomorphic sustained
VT is reproducibly inducible,
a basis for syncope seems
likely.[5]
Bradycardia or
tachycardia: sinus node
dysfunction
• Lightheadedness, weakness,
palpitations, dyspnea,
angina; bradycardia; CSM
provokes a sinus pause >3
seconds; heart rate does
not change with Valsalva
maneuver.
• ECG: shows sinus pauses
>3 seconds.
• Holter monitoring: indicates
sinus pauses >3 seconds,
which would indicate
bradycardia or tachycardia-
bradycardia syndrome. Used
for patients with paroxysmal
symptoms.
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
• Loop recorder: shows sinus
pauses >3 seconds, which
would indicate bradycardia
or tachycardia-bradycardia
syndrome. Used for patients
with paroxysmal symptoms.
• Electrophysiologic study:
measures sinus nodal
recovery time by overdrive
suppression of the sinus
node and sinoatrial
conduction time.
Acute coronary
syndromes (ACS)
• Chest pain, palpitations,
dyspnea, weakness, and
lightheadedness.
• Pale, diaphoretic; may
have low BP; heart
rate may be brady- or
tachycardic; audible S3
or S4; jugular venous
distension if right ventricular
failure from inferior wall
myocardial infarction; signs
of congestive heart failure
(CHF) such as peripheral
edema and bibasilar rales.
• ECG: may show ST-segment
elevation or depression,
dynamic T-wave changes.
• Cardiac enzymes: may show
elevated troponin and CK-
MB.
• CXR: may show increased
alveolar markings;
cardiomegaly. Pulmonary
edema causes increased
alveolar markings and can
be caused by ischemia
secondary to ACS.
Cardiomegaly suggests
concomitant CHF.
• Echocardiography:
may show wall motion
abnormalities, decreased
ejection fraction.
• Coronary angiography: may
show vessel obstruction or
coronary anomalies.
Acute aortic dissection • Chest and back pain, tearing
in nature; hypotension;
unequal pulses or BP in
2 arms; acute pulmonary
edema; focal neurologic sign
of weakness, dysarthria,
or cranial nerve defects if
carotid arteries involved.
• ECG: shows ST- and T-
wave ischemic changes.
Cardiac ischemia occurs if
low dissection involving the
coronary arteries.
• CXR: will indicate widened
mediastinum.
• Transesophageal
echocardiography: may
show false lumen or
flap in the ascending or
descending aorta, new aortic
regurgitation, or pericardial
tamponade.
• CT chest with contrast: may
show false lumen or flap in
the ascending or descending
aorta.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Severe pulmonary
hypertension
• Dyspnea, fatigue, chest
pain, palpitations, leg
edema, right-sided third
heart sound, right-sided
fourth heart sound, pulmonic
regurgitation, palpable left
parasternal heave, jugular
vein distension, peripheral
edema, cyanosis.
• CXR: shows attenuated
peripheral vascular markings
(pruning), enlarged
pulmonary artery shadows,
and opacification of the
retrosternal space on the
lateral view.
• ECG findings of right
ventricular hypertrophy: tall
R wave and small S wave
(R/S ratio >1) in lead V1,
qR complex in V1, rSR'
in V1, a large S wave and
small R wave (R/S ratio <1)
in V5 or V6, or a S1S2S3
pattern; right-axis deviation:
mean frontal plane QRS
axis >100°; right atrial
enlargement: P wave ≥2.5
mm in leads II, III, and aVF.
Pulmonary embolism • Dizziness, shortness of
breath, pleuritic chest pain,
tachycardia, tachypnea,
hypotension, loud P2, jugular
venous distension, right
ventricular lift.
• ECG: shows sinus
tachycardia; presence of
S1, Q3, and T3; usually
nonspecific.
• D-dimer: nonspecific
if positive; pulmonary
embolism excluded if
negative. Utility is in its
negative predictive value.
• CXR: shows decreased
perfusion in a segment
of pulmonary vasculature
(Westermark sign) and/or
presence of pleural effusion.
• CT pulmonary angiography:
identifies any thrombus in
the pulmonary circulation.
Aortic stenosis • Exertional dyspnea, angina,
dizziness, and syncope;
in late stages develops
into congestive heart
failure (CHF) (dyspnea,
paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea, peripheral edema);
harsh ejection systolic
murmur that radiates to
carotids, murmur loudest
at the left sternal edge and
on squatting, and softer
with Valsalva and isometric
exercises; slow rising pulse;
low carotid volume; S4 with
systolic thrill; signs of CHF
• ECG: shows left ventricular
(LV) hypertrophy and/or ST
depression from LV strain.
• CXR: indicates cardiomegaly
and/or pulmonary edema.
Aortic stenosis can cause LV
hypertrophy and pulmonary
edema.
• Echocardiography:
evaluates the valve area
(severity of stenosis), mean
atrioventricular gradient,
LV hypertrophy, ejection
fraction.
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
(pulmonary rales, lower
extremity edema, jugular
venous distension, and
hepatomegaly).
Hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy
• Systolic ejection murmur
(audible at the lower left
edge; accentuated by
exercise and standing;
lessened by lying supine or
squatting), dyspnea, angina.
• ECG: shows left-axis
deviation and prominent Q
waves in inferior and lateral
leads.
• Echocardiography:
shows asymmetric septal
hypertrophy; systolic anterior
motion of anterior mitral
valve leaflet; reversed
E:A ratio with diastolic
dysfunction; left atrial
enlargement.
• Electrophysiologic studies:
show inducible ventricular
arrhythmias and/or
conduction abnormalities.
• Cardiac catheterization:
will show increased left
ventricular (LV) outflow tract
gradient directly related
to severity of obstruction
and increased LV filling
pressures.
Vertebrobasilar transient
ischemic attack (TIA)
• Vertebrobasilar TIA is
more likely than carotid-
distribution TIAs to present
as apparent syncopal
episodes but, overall, is
extremely rare. Furthermore,
vertebrobasilar TIAs are
usually marked by other
symptoms (e.g., vertigo)
indicative of posterior
circulation compromise.
• MRI: shows brainstem
infarction.
• Carotid Doppler
ultrasonography: shows
vertebrobasilar stenosis.
• CT head: brainstem not
well visualized; may have
chronic ischemic changes
or evidence of previous
infarction. Not a sensitive
test for detecting brainstem
ischemia. Commonly
used modality because
of widespread availability
and ease of detecting
hemorrhage.
• Magnetic resonance
angiography (MRA): shows
stenosis of vertebrobasilar
artery.
Subclavian steal • Subclavian steal is a
rare condition and a very
rare cause of syncope.
Symptoms tend to occur
when patients are exercising
using the affected arm, and
• Duplex ultrasonography:
shows retrograde blood flow
in the vertebral artery.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
BP differs between the two
arms. Because of its rarity,
it should be considered only
when other causes have
been eliminated.
Migraine • Associated with basilar
artery migraine; premonitory
aura terminates in loss
of consciousness, which
is slow in onset; occipital
headache associated
with diplopia, vertigo,
tinnitus, visual changes, and
syncope; strong association
with menstrual cycle; no
significant physical finding on
examination.
• MRI and MRA: should be
normal and are used to
exclude other pathologies.
Nonsyncope transient
loss of consciousness (T-
LOC)
• This category mainly
comprises three conditions:
epilepsy, metabolic, and
endocrine disturbances.
• Epilepsy is predominated by
abnormal movements and
complex behavior patterns;
epileptic seizures do not
depend on the posture
and can occur while the
patient is supine; epilepsy
is often preceded by an
aura or strange sensations,
which is not the case with
true syncope; after an
epileptic seizure, the patient
is typically confused or may
have a focal weakness,
whereas after a syncopal
episode the patient promptly
regains their mental and
physical faculties (although
they may feel fatigued).
Temporal lobe seizures
are the form of epilepsy
most often confused with
syncope because they
can either mimic or cause
reflex bradycardia and
hypotension.
• Metabolic and endocrine
disturbances that can
cause nonsyncope T-
LOC include diabetic
coma, hypoglycemia, and
hypercapnia.
• Interictal
electroencephalogram: may
be normal.
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
• In patients with epilepsy, an
implantable loop recorder
may be able to identify
bradycardia or asystole as
a cause of syncope. Video
recordings on smart phones
recorded by friends and
relatives may be able to
help differentiate between
reflex syncope with tonic-
clonic movements and true
epileptic attacks.[57]
Adrenal insufficiency,
adrenal crisis
• Hyperpigmentation of
the skin, abdominal pain,
hypotension; related to
stressors such as surgery.
• Cortisol and
adrenocorticotropic hormone
stimulation test: must
be interpreted by an
endocrinology specialist.
Diabetic hypoglycemia • Known diabetes with
neuroglycopenic and
sympathoadrenal signs and/
or symptoms (irritability,
shaking, sweating, tremor,
palpitations, tachycardia,
anxiety, nausea, hunger,
pallor).
• Seizure and loss of
consciousness are signs of
severe hypoglycemia.
• Serum glucose: low.
Non-diabetic
hypoglycemia
• Neuroglycopenic and
sympathoadrenal signs and/
or symptoms (irritability,
shaking, sweating, tremor,
palpitations, tachycardia,
anxiety, nausea, hunger,
pallor).
• Seizure and loss of
consciousness are signs of
severe hypoglycemia.
• No history of diabetes, but
may have other known
condition associated with
hypoglycemia, or use of
non-diabetic, hypoglycemic
medication.
• Serum glucose: low.
Seizures • Prolonged jerky movements,
tongue biting, urinary or fecal
incontinence, prolonged
postictal period.
• Electroencephalogram:
shows epileptiform activity or
focal, localizing abnormality.
• Prolactin level: must be
interpreted by a neurology
specialist.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Alcohol ingestion • Vomiting, staggering gait,
slurred speech.
• Alcohol level: high or
positive.
Stroke • Focal neurologic deficit,
slurred speech, prolonged
reduction in awareness.
• Head CT: shows
hypoattenuation (darkness)
of the brain parenchyma;
loss of gray/white matter
differentiation and sulcal
effacement; hyperattenuation
(brightness) in an artery
indicates clot within the
vessel lumen.
• MRI brain: shows acute
ischemic infarct.
Narcolepsy • Excessive daytime
sleepiness despite adequate
sleep.
• Overnight polysomnogram:
often shows snoring,
frequent awakenings,
reduced sleep efficiency,
periods of rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep
within the first 20 minutes of
sleep, and multiple arousals.
• Sleep latency test: shows
sleep latency ≤8 minutes
plus ≥2 sleep-onset REM
periods.
Cataplexy • Loss of muscle tone, often
triggered by strong emotions,
slurred speech, knee
buckling, without loss of
awareness.
• Sleep history.
• Sleep actigraphy.
• Polysomnogram.
• Sleep latency test.
• All must be interpreted by
specialists in the relevant
field.
Pseudosyncope • Generalized anxiety disorder,
panic disorder, somatization
disorder, and major
depression can present with
apparent syncope; usually
young; no known cardiac
problems; frequent episodes
of recurrent syncope (as high
as many episodes per day or
per week); no specific exam
findings.
• Tilt-table test: negative.
• Video
electroencephalogram: result
must be interpreted by a
neurology specialist.[48]
Criteria
Syncope
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Diagnosis
Syncope is transient loss of consciousness (T-LOC) resulting from cerebral hypoperfusion. It is usually
characterized by complete, rapid, and spontaneous recovery, without long-lasting focal neurologic deficits.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Management
MANAGEMENT
Approach
The foundation for treatment of most NMRS syndromes is patient education.[1] Provide patients with advice
on physical techniques to abort imminent NMRS or prevent recurrence.
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of most pharmacologic treatments for NMRS. Several drugs
have been proposed, but there are few randomized clinical trials to rely on.[58] Consequently no agent,
except perhaps midodrine, can be strongly recommended in the treatment of neurally mediated faints.[59]
Patient education
Patient education is an important factor in treatment for all types of NMRS.[1] Inform patients that
although NMRS is rarely life-threatening, these types of faints tend to recur and injury can result if
preventive measures are not taken.[2] Patients need to recognize and respond to warning symptoms,
and may benefit from knowledge of basic pathophysiology; such understanding reduces injury risk and
may ultimately enhance treatment compliance. Educate patients on the avoidance of triggers such as
prolonged standing, warm environments, and coping with dental and medical settings.[1]
Medications that cause hypotension may be reduced or withdrawn where appropriate and safe.[1]
Patients susceptible to recurrent vasovagal faints should learn techniques for both aborting attacks
and reducing susceptibility to future episodes (e.g., physical maneuvers, hydration with electrolyte-
rich fluids). These patients should also be taught the value and possible risks of increased salt intake.
In situational faints, inform patients of the potential for ameliorating or entirely avoiding triggers. For
instance, suppression by smoking cessation in cough syncope, and sitting to void in micturition syncope.
In some cases, desensitization techniques (e.g., syncope associated with fear of air flight) may help.
Those with carotid sinus syndrome (CSS) should avoid wearing tight collars or neckties, although cardiac
pacing is also usually recommended.
Physical techniques
1. Physical counter-pressure maneuvers (PCM)
• PCM are advocated to abort imminent NMRS or orthostatic faints when warning symptoms are
first recognized. Useful techniques include squatting, arm tensing, leg crossing, and leg crossing
with tensing of the lower body muscles.[60] [61] In the Physical Counterpressure Manoeuvres
Trial, physical maneuvers reduced total burden and recurrence rate of syncopal events.[62]
Consequently, PCM should be an essential part of the treatment strategy for vasovagal faints. Data
are lacking for the role of PCM in patients with situational faints or carotid sinus syncope, but may
have been used in selected cases.
2. Tilt training (standing training)
• The principal goal of tilt training (more accurately termed standing training) is to enhance the
neurovascular response to orthostatic stress.[63] The favored method entails standing training
(usually at home) for progressively longer periods of time over 10-12 weeks. The recommended
starting duration is 3-5 minutes twice daily; standing duration is then gradually lengthened every 3
or 4 days to 30-40 minutes twice daily.
• The American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA)/Heart Rhythm
Society (HRS) advise that the usefulness of orthostatic training is uncertain in patients with
frequent vasovagal syncope.[1] Nonrandomized studies suggest that standing training reduces
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Management
susceptibility to reflex syncope if undertaken consistently.[64] [65] [66] However, compliance is
often a problem because the process is time consuming and boring.[13] Randomized controlled
trials have been less encouraging, suggesting that the method may not be as effective as originally
thought; further study is needed.[67] [68]
Pharmacotherapy
Volume expansion is an essential recommendation for most patients who require medical therapy for
vasovagal faints, but evidence is limited.[1] [27] Conventional approaches include increased dietary salt
and electrolyte-rich sports drinks. The primary safety concern is initiation of hypertension. Fortunately, this
is rare in younger patients, but it is a concern in older patients. Contraindications to increased salt and
fluid intake include history of hypertension, renal disease, heart failure, or cardiac dysfunction.
If a prescription drug is needed for volume expansion, fludrocortisone can be used.[1] Adverse effects
include hypertension and hypokalemia. However, clinical evidence for the efficacy of fludrocortisone is
weak.[69] [70] The Second Prevention of Syncope Trial (POST II) reported a nonsignificant decrease in
episodes of vasovagal syncope in the fludrocortisone group compared with placebo.[71]
Among other drugs suggested for preventing vasovagal faints, beta-blockers remain widely used despite
absence of strong supporting evidence. Beta-blockers were initially advocated to prevent reflex syncope
by diminishing the impact of the adrenergic surge that commonly precedes and may be part of the
vasovagal trigger. The positive supportive evidence is derived largely from small observational studies
and one single small randomized controlled trial.[72] One large randomized controlled trial (POST I)
showed no statistically significant benefit with beta-blockers in patients of all age ranges.[73]
Vaso- and venoconstrictors have also been of interest for preventing faints associated with orthostatic
intolerance. Midodrine is the principal drug in this class used for this indication. While midodrine has
been studied most extensively in patients with orthostatic hypotension, research suggests it is also
effective in vasovagal syncope.[74] [75] [76] In one multicenter randomized controlled trial (POST IV),
midodrine reduced the recurrence of syncope compared with placebo in healthy, younger patients.[77]
Methylphenidate has also been proposed for midodrine-intolerant patients, although its value has not
been established.[78] Etilephrine, which is a modest alpha- and beta-agonist, was found to be ineffective
at preventing vasovagal faints in the Vasovagal International Study.[79]
Several other drug classes have been advocated but remain of uncertain value at best. The most
important among these are the selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).[80] SSRI pretreatment is
thought to blunt a hypothesized hypersensitive serotonin response in the central nervous system that may
contribute to triggering NMRS. However, clinical trial results have been mixed.
Disopyramide, pure anticholinergics (e.g., scopolamine), and theophylline were also advocated in the
past, but the evidence is unconvincing.
Data are lacking for the role of volume expansion, fludrocortisone, and midodrine in patients with
situational faints or carotid sinus syncope, but may have been used in selected cases.
Cardiac pacing
Cardiac pacing may play a role in the treatment of carotid sinus syndrome with documented bradycardia
to prevent bradycardia-induced faint. However, patients may remain symptomatic because of persistent
vasodepressor response.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Management
MANAGEMENT
The usefulness of pacing in patients with refractory vasovagal syncope is less certain. Intuitively, it was
thought that preventing severe bradycardia (cardioinhibitory syncope) by pacing would be desirable.
Three unblinded trials showed efficacy for pacing, whereas two subsequent trials that used pacemakers
in both treatment arms did not show benefit.[42] [79] [81] [82] [83] In a randomized crossover study of
otherwise healthy patients with refractory vasovagal syncope, dual-chamber closed-loop stimulation (CLS
on) reduced syncope recurrence compared with regular pacing (CLS off).[84] However, a systematic
review found insufficient evidence to support the use of pacemaker treatments.[58] The ACC/AHA/HRS
guidelines recommend consideration of dual-chamber pacing in a narrow group of patients who are "40
years of age or older with recurrent vasovagal syncope and prolonged spontaneous pauses".[1]
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute ( summary )
vasovagal faint
1st patient education + avoiding triggering
factors
plus physical techniques
plus volume expansion with conventional
measures
adjunct fludrocortisone
adjunct midodrine
situational faint
1st patient education + reducing or avoiding
triggering factors
carotid sinus syndrome
1st patient education + avoiding triggering
factors
plus cardiac pacing
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Management
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute
vasovagal faint
1st patient education + avoiding triggering
factors
» The foundation for treatment of most NMRS
syndromes is careful patient education.[1]
Inform patients that although NMRS is rarely
life-threatening, these types of faints tend
to recur and injury can result if preventive
measures are not taken.[2] Patients need to
recognize and respond to warning symptoms,
and may benefit from some knowledge of basic
pathophysiology; such understanding reduces
injury risk and may ultimately enhance treatment
compliance. Educate patients on the avoidance
of triggers such as prolonged standing, warm
environments, and coping with dental and
medical settings.[1]
» Patients susceptible to recurrent vasovagal
faints should learn techniques for both aborting
attacks and reducing susceptibility to future
episodes (e.g., physical maneuvers, hydration
with electrolyte-rich fluids). These patients
should also be taught the value and possible
risks of increased salt intake.
» Medications that cause hypotension may be
reduced or withdrawn where appropriate and
safe.[1]
plus physical techniques
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Physical techniques such as physical counter-
pressure maneuvers (PCM) and tilt training
(standing training) are advocated to abort
imminent NMRS or orthostatic faints when
warning symptoms are first recognized.
» Useful PCM techniques include squatting,
arm tensing, leg crossing, and leg crossing
with tensing of the lower body muscles.[60] [61]
In the Physical Counterpressure Manoeuvres
Trial, physical maneuvers reduced total burden
and recurrence rate of syncopal events.[62]
Consequently, PCM should be an essential part
of the treatment strategy.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
» The principal goal of tilt training (more
accurately termed standing training) is to
enhance the neurovascular response to
orthostatic stress.[63] The favored method
entails standing training (usually at home) for
progressively longer periods of time over 10-12
weeks. The recommended starting duration is
3-5 minutes twice daily; standing duration is then
gradually lengthened every 3 or 4 days to 30-40
minutes twice daily.
» The American College of Cardiology
(ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA)/
Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) advise that the
usefulness of orthostatic training is uncertain
in patients with frequent vasovagal syncope.[1]
Nonrandomized studies suggest that standing
training reduces susceptibility to reflex syncope
if undertaken consistently.[64] [65] [66] However,
compliance is often a problem because the
process is time-consuming and boring.[13]
Randomized controlled trials have been less
encouraging, suggesting that the method may
not be as effective as originally thought; further
study is therefore needed.[67] [68]
plus volume expansion with conventional
measures
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Volume expansion is an essential
recommendation for most patients who require
medical therapy for vasovagal faints, but
evidence is limited.[1] [27]
» Conventional approaches include increased
dietary salt and electrolyte-rich sports drinks.
The primary safety concern is initiation of
hypertension. Fortunately, this is rare in younger
patients, but it is a concern in older patients.
Contraindications to increased salt and fluid
intake include history of hypertension, renal
disease, heart failure, or cardiac dysfunction.
adjunct fludrocortisone
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» fludrocortisone: 0.1 to 0.2 mg orally once
daily
» If a prescription drug is needed for volume
expansion, fludrocortisone can be used.[1]
Adverse effects include hypertension and
hypokalemia. However, clinical evidence for the
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Management
Acute
efficacy of fludrocortisone is weak.[69] [70] The
Second Prevention of Syncope Trial (POST II)
reported a nonsignificant decrease in episodes
of vasovagal syncope in the fludrocortisone
group compared with placebo.[71]
» Treatment duration varies in clinical practice
from months to years.
adjunct midodrine
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» midodrine: 2.5 to 10 mg orally three times
daily
» There is insufficient evidence to support
the use of most pharmacologic treatments for
NMRS. Several drugs have been proposed, but
there are few randomized clinical trials to rely
on.[58] Consequently no agent, except perhaps
midodrine, can be strongly recommended in
treatment of neurally mediated faints.[59]
» While midodrine has been studied most
extensively in patients with orthostatic
hypotension, research suggests it is also
effective in vasovagal syncope.[74] [75] [76]
In one multicenter randomized controlled trial
(POST IV), midodrine reduced the recurrence
of syncope compared with placebo in healthy,
younger patients.[77]
» Treatment duration varies in clinical practice
from months to years.
situational faint
1st patient education + reducing or avoiding
triggering factors
» The foundation for treatment of most NMRS
syndromes is careful patient education.[1]
Inform patients that although NMRS is rarely life-
threatening, these types of faints tend to recur
and injury can result if preventive measures are
not taken.[2] Patients need to recognize and
respond to warning symptoms, and may benefit
from some knowledge of basic pathophysiology;
such understanding reduces injury risk and may
ultimately enhance treatment compliance.
» In situational faints, inform patients of the
potential for ameliorating or entirely avoiding
triggers; for instance, suppression by smoking
cessation in cough syncope, and sitting to
void in micturition syncope. In some cases,
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
desensitization techniques (e.g., syncope
associated with fear of air flight) may help.
» Data are lacking for the role of physical
techniques, volume expansion, fludrocortisone,
and midodrine in patients with situational faints,
but may have been used in selected cases.
carotid sinus syndrome
1st patient education + avoiding triggering
factors
» The foundation for treatment of most NMRS
syndromes is careful patient education.[1]
Inform patients that although NMRS is rarely life-
threatening, these types of faints tend to recur
and injury can result if preventive measures are
not taken.[2] Patients need to recognize and
respond to warning symptoms, and may benefit
from some knowledge of basic pathophysiology;
such understanding reduces injury risk and may
ultimately enhance treatment compliance.
» Patients with carotid sinus syndrome should
avoid wearing tight collars or neckties.
» Data are lacking for the role of physical
techniques, volume expansion, fludrocortisone,
and midodrine in patients with dominant
vasodepressor or mixed carotid sinus syncope,
but may have been used in selected cases.
plus cardiac pacing
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Cardiac pacing may play a role in the
treatment of carotid sinus syndrome with
documented bradycardia to prevent bradycardia-
induced faint. However, patients may
remain symptomatic because of persistent
vasodepressor response.
» The usefulness of pacing in patients with
refractory vasovagal syncope is less certain.
Intuitively, it was thought that preventing severe
bradycardia (cardioinhibitory syncope) by
pacing would be desirable. Three unblinded
trials showed efficacy for pacing, whereas two
subsequent trials that used pacemakers in
both treatment arms did not show benefit.[42]
[79] [81] [82] [83] In a randomized crossover
study of otherwise healthy patients with
refractory vasovagal syncope, dual-chamber
closed-loop stimulation (CLS on) reduced
syncope recurrence compared with regular
pacing (CLS off).[84] However, a systematic
review found insufficient evidence to support
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Management
Acute
the use of pacemaker treatments.[58] The
American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association/Heart Rhythm Society guidelines
recommend consideration of dual-chamber
pacing in a narrow group of patients who are "40
years of age or older with recurrent vasovagal
syncope and prolonged spontaneous pauses".[1]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Management
MANAGEMENT
Emerging
Catheter-based ablation
Reserved for syncope related to tachyarrhythmias.[2] Some research suggests a possible role for treatment
of recurrent vasovagal syncope refractory to conventional treatment. In one retrospective cohort study, 91.2%
(52/57) patients with vasovagal syncope treated with catheter ablation were free from syncope after 12-102
months' follow-up.[85]
Secondary prevention
Strategies for reducing syncope recurrences in the long term comprise physical techniques to improve
orthostatic tolerance, pharmacologic interventions to prevent depletion of intravascular volume and/or
enhance arterial and venous tone, and cardiac pacing to avert bradycardia.
Patient discussions
Patients should contact their physician if there is a change in frequency or presentation of symptoms.
Patient education is an important factor in treatment for all types of NMRS.[1] Patients should avoid or
mitigate situations where syncope has occurred in the past (e.g., prolonged standing, pain, emotional
distress, defecation, dehydration).[1] If they experience prodromal symptoms (e.g., dizziness, changes
in vision/hearing), advise patients to lie down if possible (and if safe to do so) with their legs elevated.
Patients may try arm counter-pulsation (pulling contralateral hands against each other, hooking the hands
together, and pulling with the arms), leg tensing, and leg crossing to try to improve venous return to the
heart and therefore perfusion of the brain.[60] [61] For prevention, patients can try support stockings that
extend to the thigh. 
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Follow up
Monitoring
Monitoring
Early follow-up should be scheduled for patients with vasovagal syncope discharged after the initial
evaluation. Patients should visit their physician annually for monitoring.
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
injuries and fractures short term high
A particular concern in older and infirm patients due to recurrent falls. In one meta-analysis, injury due to
vasovagal syncope occurred in one third of patients; the rate of major injury was 13.9%.[89]
Falls due to syncope can result in significant trauma and should be evaluated as clinically warranted.
extradural or cerebral hemorrhage secondary to
trauma
short term medium
Often unrecognized initially but may account for later onset of neurologic symptoms, including diminished
mental status.
The presence of neurologic signs/symptoms may necessitate a visit to the emergency department, where
a CT scan of the head is ordered to evaluate for a cerebral hemorrhage or subdural hematoma.
Prognosis
Recurrences are common but often occur in clusters.[86] In one meta-analysis, 36% of patients in
randomized and cohort studies fainted during the study follow-up period (median follow-up 2 years).[87]
The estimated 1-year mortality rate after syncope (all causes) is 8.4%.[88] The mortality risk is mainly related
to cardiovascular causes.[25] Patients with NMRS typically have a better prognosis than patients with cardiac
syncope, but injury is a concern due to recurrent falls, especially in older people.[13] In one meta-analysis,
injury due to vasovagal syncope occurred in one third of patients; the rate of major injury was 13.9%.[89]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Guidelines
GUIDELINES
Diagnostic guidelines
International
ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the evaluation and management of patients with
syncope (https://www.acc.org/guidelines)   [1]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; Heart Rhythm Society
Last published: 2017
Recommendations for tilt table testing and other provocative cardiovascular
autonomic tests in conditions that may cause transient loss of
consciousness (https://www.efasweb.com/web/index.php/consensus-
guideline)   [48]
Published by: European Federation of Autonomic Societies; American
Autonomic Society; European Academy of Neurology
Last published: 2021
2018 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of syncope (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines)   [2]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2018
Treatment guidelines
International
ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the evaluation and management of patients with
syncope (https://www.acc.org/guidelines)   [1]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; Heart Rhythm Society
Last published: 2017
2018 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of syncope (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines)   [2]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2018
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope References
Key articles
• Shen WK, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the evaluation and
management of patients with syncope: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on clinical practice guidelines, and the Heart Rhythm Society.
Heart Rhythm. 2017 Aug;14(8):e155-217.  Full text (https://www.heartrhythmjournal.com/article/
S1547-5271(17)30297-7/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28286247?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Brignole M, Moya A, de Lange FJ, et al; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2018 ESC guidelines for the
diagnosis and management of syncope. Eur Heart J. 2018 Jun 1;39(21):1883-948.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/39/21/1883/4939241)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29562304?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Moya A, Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al; International Study on Syncope of Uncertain Etiology (ISSUE)
Investigators. Mechanism of syncope in patients with isolated syncope and in patients with tilt-
positive syncope. Circulation. 2001 Sep 11;104(11):1261-7.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/hc3601.095708)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11551877?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Sandhu RK, Raj SR, Manlucu J, et al; Primary Writing Committee. Canadian Cardiovascular Society
clinical practice update on the assessment and management of syncope. Can J Cardiol. 2020
Aug;36(8):1167-77.  Full text (https://www.onlinecjc.ca/article/S0828-282X(19)31549-1/fulltext)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32624296?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Reed MJ, Newby DE, Coull AJ, et al. The ROSE (risk stratification of syncope in the emergency
department) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Feb 23;55(8):713-21.  Full text (https://www.jacc.org/
doi/10.1016/j.jacc.2009.09.049)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20170806?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Benditt DG, Ferguson DW, Grubb BP, et al. Tilt table testing for assessing syncope. American College
of Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996 Jul;28(1):263-75. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/8752825?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Raviele A, Giada F, Menozzi C, et al; Vasovagal Syncope and Pacing Trial Investigators.
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of permanent cardiac pacing for the
treatment of recurrent tilt-induced vasovagal syncope. The Vasovagal Syncope and Pacing
Trial (SYNPACE). Eur Heart J. 2004 Oct;25(19):1741-8.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/25/19/1741/528715)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15451153?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. Shen WK, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the evaluation and
management of patients with syncope: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on clinical practice guidelines, and the Heart Rhythm Society.
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope References
REFERENCES
Heart Rhythm. 2017 Aug;14(8):e155-217.  Full text (https://www.heartrhythmjournal.com/article/
S1547-5271(17)30297-7/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28286247?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Brignole M, Moya A, de Lange FJ, et al; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2018 ESC guidelines for the
diagnosis and management of syncope. Eur Heart J. 2018 Jun 1;39(21):1883-948.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/39/21/1883/4939241)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29562304?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Blanc J-J, Benditt DG. Syncope: definition, classification, and multiple potential causes. In: Benditt
DG, Blanc J-J, Brignole M, et al, eds. The evaluation and treatment of syncope: a handbook for clinical
practice. Elmsford, NY: Futura/Blackwell; 2003:3-10.
4. Kenny RA, Ingram A, Bayliss J, et al. Head-up tilt: a useful test for investigating unexplained syncope.
Lancet. 1986 Jun 14;1(8494):1352-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2872472?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Olshansky B, Poole JE, Johnson G, et al; SCD-HeFT Investigators. Syncope predicts the outcome
of cardiomyopathy patients: analysis of the SCD-HeFT study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008 Apr
1;51(13):1277-82.  Full text (https://www.jacc.org/doi/10.1016/j.jacc.2007.11.065)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18371559?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. Prasad K, Williams L, Campbell R, et al. Episodic syncope in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: evidence
for inappropriate vasodilation. Heart. 2008 Oct;94(10):1312-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18653581?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Moya A, Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al; International Study on Syncope of Uncertain Etiology (ISSUE)
Investigators. Mechanism of syncope in patients with isolated syncope and in patients with tilt-
positive syncope. Circulation. 2001 Sep 11;104(11):1261-7.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/hc3601.095708)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11551877?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Thijs RD, Kruit MC, van Buchem MA, et al. Syncope in migraine: the population-based
CAMERA study. Neurology. 2006 Apr 11;66(7):1034-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16606915?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Alciati A, Shiffer D, Dipaola F, et al. Psychogenic pseudosyncope: clinical features, diagnosis
and management. J Atr Fibrillation. 2020 Jun-Jul;13(1):2399.  Full text (http://jafib.com/
published.php?type=full&id=2399)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33024500?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Mathias CJ, Bannister R. Clinical features and evaluation of the primary chronic autonomic failure
syndromes. In: Bannister R, Mathias CJ, eds. Autonomic failure: a textbook of clinical disorders of the
autonomic nervous system. 4th ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1999:562.
11. Blanc JJ, L'Her C, Touiza A, et al. Prospective evaluation and outcome of patients admitted
for syncope over a 1 year period. Eur Heart J. 2002 May;23(10):815-20.  Full text (https://
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope References
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/23/10/815/451506)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12009722?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Disertori M, Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al. Management of patients with syncope referred urgently
to general hospitals. Europace. 2003 Jul;5(3):283-91.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
europace/article/5/3/283/599679)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12842645?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Runser LA, Gauer RL, Houser A. Syncope: evaluation and differential diagnosis. Am Fam Physician.
2017 Mar 1;95(5):303-12.  Full text (https://www.aafp.org/pubs/afp/issues/2017/0301/p303.html)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28290647?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Ganzeboom KS, Mairuhu G, Reitsma JB, et al. Lifetime cumulative incidence of syncope
in the general population: a study of 549 Dutch subjects aged 35-60 years. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol. 2006 Nov;17(11):1172-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17074006?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Ruwald MH, Hansen ML, Lamberts M, et al. The relation between age, sex, comorbidity,
and pharmacotherapy and the risk of syncope: a Danish nationwide study. Europace. 2012
Oct;14(10):1506-14.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/europace/article/14/10/1506/448196)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22588456?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Saklani P, Krahn A, Klein G. Syncope. Circulation. 2013 Mar 26;127(12):1330-9.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.138396)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23529534?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Lipsitz LA, Wei JY, Rowe JW. Syncope in an elderly institutionalised population: prevalence, incidence,
and associated risk. Q J Med. 1985 Apr;55(216):45-54. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/4011842?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Soteriades ES, Evans JC, Larson MG, et al. Incidence and prognosis of syncope. N Engl J Med. 2002
Sep 19;347(12):878-85.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa012407)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12239256?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Benditt DG, Brignole M. Syncope: is a diagnosis a diagnosis? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Mar
5;41(5):791-4.  Full text (https://www.jacc.org/doi/10.1016/S0735-1097%2802%2902928-5)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12628724?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Van Lieshout JJ, Wieling W, Karemaker JM, et al. Syncope, cerebral perfusion, and oxygenation.
J Appl Physiol. 2003 Mar;94(3):833-48.  Full text (https://journals.physiology.org/doi/full/10.1152/
japplphysiol.00260.2002)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12571122?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Rowell LB. Cerebral and coronary circulations. In: Rowell LB, ed. Human cardiovascular control. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1993:117-36.
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope References
REFERENCES
22. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Gianfranchi L, et al. Neurally mediated syncope detected by carotid sinus
massage and head-up tilt test in sick sinus syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 1991 Oct 15;68(10):1032-6.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1927916?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Sarasin FP, Louis-Simonet M, Carballo D, et al. Prospective evaluation of patients with syncope: a
population-based study. Am J Med. 2001 Aug 15;111(3):177-84. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11530027?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Farwell D, Sulke N. How do we diagnose syncope? J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2002 Jan;13(1
Suppl):S9-13. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11843472?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. D'Ascenzo F, Biondi-Zoccai G, Reed MJ, et al. Incidence, etiology and predictors of adverse
outcomes in 43,315 patients presenting to the Emergency Department with syncope: an
international meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Jul 15;167(1):57-62.  Full text (https://iris.unimore.it/
retrieve/handle/11380/793892/171529/1-s2.0-S0167527311021401-main.pdf)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22192287?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. American Academy of Pediatrics – Section on Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery. Five things physicians
and patients should question. Choosing Wisely, an initiative of the ABIM Foundation. 2022 [internet
publication].  Full text (https://web.archive.org/web/20230320224131/https://www.choosingwisely.org/
societies/american-academy-of-pediatrics-section-on-cardiology-and-cardiac-surgery)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/insert id?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Sandhu RK, Raj SR, Manlucu J, et al; Primary Writing Committee. Canadian Cardiovascular Society
clinical practice update on the assessment and management of syncope. Can J Cardiol. 2020
Aug;36(8):1167-77.  Full text (https://www.onlinecjc.ca/article/S0828-282X(19)31549-1/fulltext)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32624296?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Prandoni P, Lensing AW, Prins MH, et al; PESIT Investigators. Prevalence of pulmonary embolism
among patients hospitalized for syncope. N Engl J Med. 2016 Oct 20;375(16):1524-31.  Full text
(https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1602172)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27797317?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Quinn JV, Stiell IG, McDermott DA, et al. Derivation of the San Francisco Syncope Rule to predict
patients with short-term serious outcomes. Ann Emerg Med. 2004 Feb;43(2):224-32. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14747812?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Reed MJ, Newby DE, Coull AJ, et al. The ROSE (risk stratification of syncope in the emergency
department) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Feb 23;55(8):713-21.  Full text (https://www.jacc.org/
doi/10.1016/j.jacc.2009.09.049)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20170806?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Zimmermann T, du Fay de Lavallaz J, Nestelberger T, et al. International validation of the canadian
syncope risk score: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2022 Jun;175(6):783-94. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35467933?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Colivicchi F, Ammirati F, Melina D, et al. Development and prospective validation of a risk stratification
system for patients with syncope in the emergency department: the OESIL risk score. Eur Heart J.
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope References
2003 May;24(9):811-9.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/24/9/811/2733957)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12727148?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Del Rosso A, Ungar A, Maggi R, et al. Clinical predictors of cardiac syncope at initial evaluation in
patients referred urgently to a general hospital: the EGSYS score. Heart. 2008 Dec;94(12):1620-6. 
Full text (https://heart.bmj.com/content/94/12/1620.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18519550?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Transient loss of consciousness ('blackouts') in over
16s. Sep 2014 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg109/chapter/1-
Guidance)
35. Brignole M, Moya A, de Lange FJ, et al; ESC Scientific Document Group. Practical instructions for
the 2018 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of syncope. Eur Heart J. 2018 Jun
1;39(21):e43-80.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/39/21/e43/4939242)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29562291?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. American Epilepsy Society. Five things physicians and patients should question. Choosing Wisely, an
initiative of the ABIM Foundation. 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://aesnet.org/clinical-care/
running-your-practice/practice-tools)
37. American College of Emergency Physicians. Thirty five things physicians and patients should
question. Choosing Wisely, an initiative of the ABIM Foundation, 2014 [internet publication].  Full text
(https://web.archive.org/web/20230131173532/https://www.choosingwisely.org/clinician-lists/acep-
avoid-head-ct-for-asymptomatic-adults-with-syncope)
38. American Academy of Neurology. Five things physicians and patients should question. Choosing
Wisely, an initiative of the ABIM Foundation. 2022 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
web.archive.org/web/20221205215637/https://www.choosingwisely.org/societies/american-academy-
of-neurology)
39. Benditt DG, Ferguson DW, Grubb BP, et al. Tilt table testing for assessing syncope. American College
of Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996 Jul;28(1):263-75. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/8752825?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Almquist A, Goldenberg IF, Milstein S, et al. Provocation of bradycardia and hypotension by
isoproterenol and upright posture in patients with unexplained syncope. N Engl J Med. 1989 Feb
9;320(6):346-51. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2913492?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Fitzpatrick AP, Theodorakis G, Vardas P, et al. Methodology of head-up tilt testing in patients
with unexplained syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1991 Jan;17(1):125-30. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1987214?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Raviele A, Giada F, Menozzi C, et al; Vasovagal Syncope and Pacing Trial Investigators.
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of permanent cardiac pacing for the
treatment of recurrent tilt-induced vasovagal syncope. The Vasovagal Syncope and Pacing
Trial (SYNPACE). Eur Heart J. 2004 Oct;25(19):1741-8.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope References
REFERENCES
eurheartj/article/25/19/1741/528715)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15451153?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Kapoor WN, Smith MA, Miller NL. Upright tilt testing in evaluating syncope: a comprehensive literature
review. Am J Med. 1994 Jul;97(1):78-88. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8030660?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Morley CA, Sutton R. Carotid sinus syncope. Int J Cardiol. 1984 Sep;6(3):287-93. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6480160?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Dandy WE. Glossopharyngeal neuralgia (tic douloureux): its diagnosis and treatment. Arch Surg. 1927
Aug;15(2):198-214.
46. Gottesman MH, Ibrahim B, Elfenbein AS, et al. Cardiac arrest caused by trigeminal neuralgia.
Headache. 1996 Jun;36(6):392-4. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8707560?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Morillo CA, Leitch JW, Yee R, et al. A placebo-controlled trial of intravenous and oral disopyramide
for prevention of neurally mediated syncope induced by head-up tilt. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993
Dec;22(7):1843-8.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221053952300144X)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8245337?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Thijs RD, Brignole M, Falup-Pecurariu C, et al. Recommendations for tilt table testing and
other provocative cardiovascular autonomic tests in conditions that may cause transient loss of
consciousness: consensus statement of the European Federation of Autonomic Societies (EFAS)
endorsed by the American Autonomic Society (AAS) and the European Academy of Neurology
(EAN). Auton Neurosci. 2021 Jul;233:102792.  Full text (https://www.autonomicneuroscience.com/
article/S1566-0702(21)00022-9/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33752997?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Raviele A, Gasparini G, Di Pede F, et al. Usefulness of head-up tilt test in evaluating patients
with syncope of unknown origin and negative electrophysiologic study. Am J Cardiol. 1990 Jun
1;65(20):1322-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1971497?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Menozzi C, Brignole M, Garcia-Civera R, et al; International Study on Syncope of Uncertain
Etiology (ISSUE) Investigators. Mechanism of syncope in patients with heart disease
and negative electrophysiologic test. Circulation. 2002 Jun 11;105(23):2741-5.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/01.CIR.0000018125.31973.87)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12057988?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Moya A, et al; International Study on Syncope of Uncertain Etiology
(ISSUE) Investigators. Mechanism of syncope in patients with bundle branch block and
negative electrophysiological test. Circulation. 2001 Oct 23;104(17):2045-50.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/hc4201.097837)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11673344?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Solari D, Maggi R, Oddone D, et al. Clinical context and outcome of carotid sinus syndrome diagnosed
by means of the 'method of symptoms'. Europace. 2014 Jun;16(6):928-34.  Full text (https://
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope References
academic.oup.com/europace/article/16/6/928/559723)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24058183?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Flammang D, Church T, Waynberger M, et al. Can adenosine 5'-triphosphate be used to select
treatment in severe vasovagal syndrome? Circulation. 1997 Aug 19;96(4):1201-8.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/01.CIR.96.4.1201)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9286950?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Flammang D, Chassing A, Donal E, et al. Reproducibility of the adenosine-5'-triphosphate test
in vasovagal syndrome. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 1998 Nov;9(11):1161-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9835259?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Blanc JJ. Clinical laboratory testing: what is the role of tilt-table testing, active standing test, carotid
massage, electrophysiological testing and ATP test in the syncope evaluation? Prog Cardiovasc
Dis. 2013 Jan-Feb;55(4):418-24. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23472780?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Benditt DG, Samniah N, Pham S, et al. Effect of cough on heart rate and blood pressure in patients
with "cough syncope". Heart Rhythm. 2005 Aug;2(8):807-13. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16051114?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Kulakowski P. Reflex syncope: assessment and management. Heart. 2023 Nov 10;109(23):1785-92.
58. Jacobus JR, Johannes BR, Catherine NB, et al. Drugs and pacemakers for vasovagal, carotid
sinus and situational syncope. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Oct 5;(10):CD004194.  Full text
(https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD004194.pub3/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21975744?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Izcovich A, González Malla C, Manzotti M, et al. Midodrine for orthostatic hypotension and recurrent
reflex syncope: a systematic review. Neurology. 2014 Sep 23;83(13):1170-7. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25150287?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Krediet CT, van Dijk N, Linzer M, et al. Management of vasovagal syncope: controlling or aborting
faints by leg crossing and muscle tensing. Circulation. 2002 Sep 24;106(13):1684-9.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/01.CIR.0000030939.12646.8F)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12270863?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Brignole M, Croci F, Menozzi C, et al. Isometric arm counter-pressure maneuvers to abort
impending vasovagal syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002 Dec 4;40(11):2053-9.  Full text (https://
www.jacc.org/doi/10.1016/S0735-1097%2802%2902683-9)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12475469?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. van Dijk N, Quartieri F, Blanc JJ, et al; PC-Trial Investigators. Effectiveness of physical
counterpressure maneuvers in preventing vasovagal syncope: the Physical Counterpressure
Manoeuvres Trial (PC-Trial). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Oct 17;48(8):1652-7.  Full text (https://
www.jacc.org/doi/10.1016/j.jacc.2006.06.059)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17045903?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope References
REFERENCES
63. Ector H, Reybrouck T, Heidbüchel H, et al. Tilt training: a new treatment for recurrent neurocardiogenic
syncope and severe orthostatic intolerance. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1998 Jan;21(1 Pt 2):193-6.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9474671?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64. Di Girolamo E, Di Iorio C, Leonzio L, et al. Usefulness of a tilt training program for the prevention
of refractory neurocardiogenic syncope in adolescents: a controlled study. Circulation. 1999 Oct
26;100(17):1798-801.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/01.CIR.100.17.1798)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10534467?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
65. Reybrouck T, Heidbüchel H, Van De Werf F, et al. Long-term follow-up results of tilt training therapy in
patients with recurrent neurocardiogenic syncope. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2002 Oct;25(10):1441-6.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12418741?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Kinay O, Yazici M, Nazli C, et al. Tilt training for recurrent neurocardiogenic syncope:
effectiveness, patient compliance, and scheduling the frequency of training sessions. Jpn
Heart J. 2004 Sep;45(5):833-43. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15557724?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. On YK, Park J, Huh J, et al. Is home orthostatic self-training effective in preventing neurally mediated
syncope? Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2007 May;30(5):638-43. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17461874?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. Gurevitz O, Barsheshet A, Bar-Lev D, et al. Tilt training: does it have a role in preventing
vasovagal syncope? Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2007 Dec;30(12):1499-505. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18070305?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
69. Scott WA, Pongiglione G, Bromberg BI, et al. Randomized comparison of atenolol and fludrocortisone
acetate in the treatment of pediatric neurally mediated syncope. Am J Cardiol. 1995 Aug
15;76(5):400-2. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7639169?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. Salim MA, Di Sessa TG. Effectiveness of fludrocortisone and salt in preventing syncope recurrence
in children: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005 Feb
15;45(4):484-8.  Full text (https://www.jacc.org/doi/10.1016/j.jacc.2004.11.033)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15708690?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
71. Sheldon R, Morillo CA, Krahn A, et al. A randomized clinical trial of fludrocortisone for the prevention
of vasovagal syncope (POST II). Paper presented at: Canadian Cardiovascular Congress 2011.
Vancouver, Canada. Abstract 903. Can J Cardiol. 2011 Sep 1;27(suppl 5):S335-6.  Full text (https://
www.onlinecjc.ca/article/S0828-282X(11)01050-6/fulltext)
72. Mahanonda N, Bhuripanyo K, Kangkagate C, et al. Randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial of oral atenolol in patients with unexplained syncope and positive upright tilt table test results.
Am Heart J. 1995 Dec;130(6):1250-3. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7484777?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Sheldon R, Connolly S, Rose S, et al; POST Investigators. Prevention of Syncope Trial (POST):
a randomized, placebo-controlled study of metoprolol in the prevention of vasovagal syncope.
Circulation. 2006 Mar 7;113(9):1164-70.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope References
CIRCULATIONAHA.105.535161)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16505178?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74. Jankovic J, Gilden JL, Hiner BC, et al. Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension: a double-blind,
placebo-controlled study with midodrine. Am J Med. 1993 Jul;95(1):38-48. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7687093?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
75. Ward CR, Gray JC, Gilroy JJ, et al. Midodrine: a role in the management of neurocardiogenic syncope.
Heart. 1998 Jan;79(1):45-9.  Full text (https://heart.bmj.com/content/79/1/45)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9505918?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. Perez-Lugones A, Schweikert R, Pavia S, et al. Usefulness of midodrine in patients with
severely symptomatic neurocardiogenic syncope: a randomized control study. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol. 2001 Aug;12(8):935-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11513446?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
77. Sheldon R, Faris P, Tang A, et al; POST 4 investigators. Midodrine for the prevention of vasovagal
syncope: a randomized clinical trial. Ann Intern Med. 2021 Oct;174(10):1349-56. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34339231?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
78. Grubb BP, Kosinski D, Mouhaffel A, et al. A. The use of methylphenidate in the treatment of refractory
neurocardiogenic syncope. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1996 May;19(5):836-40. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8734752?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
79. Sutton R, Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al; the Vasovagal Syncope International Study (VASIS)
Investigators. Dual-chamber pacing in the treatment of neurally mediated tilt-positive cardioinhibitory
syncope. Pacemaker versus no therapy: a multicenter randomized study. Circulation. 2000 Jul
18;102(3):294-9.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/01.CIR.102.3.294)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10899092?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80. Grubb BP, Wolfe DA, Samoil D, et al. Usefulness of fluoxetine hydrochloride for prevention of resistant
upright tilt induced syncope. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1993 Mar;16(3 Pt 1):458-64. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7681197?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
81. Ammirati F, Colivicchi F, Santini M; Syncope Diagnosis and Treatment Study Investigators.
Permanent cardiac pacing versus medical treatment for the prevention of recurrent vasovagal
syncope: a multicenter, randomized, controlled trial. Circulation. 2001 Jul 3;104(1):52-7.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/hc2601.091708)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11435337?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82. Connolly SJ, Sheldon R, Roberts RS, et al. The North American Vasovagal Pacemaker
Study (VPS). A randomized trial of permanent cardiac pacing for the prevention of vasovagal
syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999 Jan;33(1):16-20.  Full text (https://www.jacc.org/doi/10.1016/
S0735-1097%2898%2900549-X)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9935002?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
83. Connolly SJ, Sheldon R, Thorpe KE, et al; VPS II Investigators. Pacemaker therapy for prevention of
syncope in patients with recurrent severe vasovagal syncope. Second Vasovagal Pacemaker Study
(VPS II): a randomized trial. JAMA. 2003 May 7;289(17):2224-9.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope References
REFERENCES
journals/jama/fullarticle/196492)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12734133?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
84. Russo V, Rago A, Papa AA, et al. The effect of dual-chamber closed-loop stimulation on syncope
recurrence in healthy patients with tilt-induced vasovagal cardioinhibitory syncope: a prospective,
randomised, single-blind, crossover study. Heart. 2013 Nov;99(21):1609-13. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23723446?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
85. Sun W, Zheng L, Qiao Y, et al. Catheter ablation as a treatment for vasovagal syncope: long-term
outcome of endocardial autonomic modification of the left atrium. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016 Jul
8;5(7):e003471.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/JAHA.116.003471)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27402231?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
86. Sahota IS, Maxey C, Pournazari P, et al. Clusters, gaps, and randomness: vasovagal syncope
recurrence patterns. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2017 Sep;3(9):1046-53.  Full text (https://www.jacc.org/
doi/10.1016/j.jacep.2017.02.008)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29759709?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
87. Pournazari P, Sahota I, Sheldon R. High remission rates in vasovagal syncope: systematic review
and meta-analysis of observational and randomized studies. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2017
Apr;3(4):384-92.  Full text (https://www.jacc.org/doi/10.1016/j.jacep.2016.10.012)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29759452?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
88. Solbiati M, Casazza G, Dipaola F, et al. Syncope recurrence and mortality: a systematic
review. Europace. 2015 Feb;17(2):300-8.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/europace/
article/17/2/300/2802596)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25476868?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
89. Jorge JG, Raj SR, Teixeira PS, et al. Likelihood of injury due to vasovagal syncope: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Europace. 2021 Jul 18;23(7):1092-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33693816?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Images
Images
Figure 1: Classification of syncope
From personal collection of Dr David Benditt; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Images
IMAGES
Figure 2: Ambulatory monitoring recording obtained during a spontaneous faint associated with marked
bradycardia. Baseline movement reflects the patient's distress
From personal collection of Dr David Benditt; used with permission
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Images
Figure 3: ECG trace revealing an episode of torsades de pointes in a patient with recurrent faints and evident
long-QT syndrome
From personal collection of Dr David Benditt; used with permission
Figure 4: Initial evaluation and further management strategy of syncope based on European Society
of Cardiology Task Force Guidelines. AECG, ambulatory ECG; CSM, carotid sinus massage; EP,
electrophysiologic; ILR, implantable loop recorder; SMU, syncope management unit
From personal collection of Dr David Benditt; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Neurally mediated reflex syncope Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 17, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Bryant Lin, MD
Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine
Division of Primary Care and Population Health, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
DISCLOSURES: BL declares that he has no competing interests.
Paul J. Wang, MD, FACC, FHRS
Professor of Medicine
Stanford Arrhythmia Service, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
DISCLOSURES: PJW receives fellowship support, honoraria, and clinical trial support from Medtronic,
which manufactures LINQ, an implantable loop recorder.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Bryant Lin and Dr Paul J. Wang would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr David G. Benditt and Dr John T.
Nguyen, previous contributors to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: DGB has consultant and equity positions: Medtronic Inc., St Jude Medical Inc., Transoma
Inc., Cardionet Inc. DGB is also an author of several references cited in this topic. JTN declares that he has
no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Sanjiv Petkar, MBBS, MD, DM (Cardiology), MRCP
Consultant Cardiologist
Hull and East Riding of Yorkshire NHS Trust, Castle Hill Hospital, East Yorkshire, UK
DISCLOSURES: SP has received sponsorship in the past from Medtronic, Inc. and St Jude Medical, Inc. for
attending conferences. He has received speaker's fees from Medtronic, Inc. In addition, he was in receipt of
a research grant from Medtronic, Inc. to the University of Manchester.
Kenneth A. Ellenbogen, MD
Kontos Professor of Cardiology
Medical College of Virginia, Richmond, VA
DISCLOSURES: KAE declares that he has no competing interests.
Andrew Parfitt, MBBS, FFAEM
Clinical Director
Acute Medicine, Associate Medical Director, Consultant Emergency Medicine, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS
Foundation Trust, Clinical Lead and Consultant, Accident Emergency Medicine, St Thomas' Hospital,
London, UK
DISCLOSURES: AP declares that he has no competing interests.
