# Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction

=== Page 1 ===
Non-ST-elevation
myocardial infarction
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Jul 25, 2023
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Etiology  4
Pathophysiology  4
Classification  5
Case history  6
Diagnosis  8
Approach  8
History and exam  15
Risk factors  16
Tests  19
Differentials  25
Criteria  28
Management  30
Approach  30
Treatment algorithm overview  36
Treatment algorithm  38
Primary prevention  55
Secondary prevention  56
Patient discussions  56
Follow up  58
Monitoring  58
Complications  59
Prognosis  60
Guidelines  62
Diagnostic guidelines  62
Treatment guidelines  63
References  65
Images  83
Disclaimer  86
=== Page 3 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Overview
Summary
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) is part of the acute coronary syndrome spectrum.
Symptoms are indistinguishable from those of unstable angina. Most patients present with chest pain.
However, NSTEMI is differentiated from unstable angina by a rise in level of cardiac troponin.
ECG, biomarkers (high-sensitivity troponin), and echocardiogram are the first-line investigations in all
patients. Other investigations (e.g., chest x-ray and computed tomography chest) are useful to exclude other
conditions.
Early risk stratification and treatment with anti-ischemic (beta-blockers, nitrates), anticoagulant (heparin), and
dual antiplatelet agents (aspirin plus a P2Y12 inhibitor) is needed. Higher-risk patients should be considered
for an early invasive strategy (coronary angiography and revascularization in 12-24 hours).
Complications are progression or worsening of myocardial infarction, heart failure, cardiogenic shock,
arrhythmias, and death.
Definition
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) is an acute ischemic event causing irreversible necrosis of
heart muscle.[1] The initial ECG may show ischemic changes such as ST depressions, T-wave inversions,
or transient ST elevations; however, it may also be normal or show nonspecific changes. If persistent ST
elevation, evidence of posterior myocardial infarction, or a new left bundle-branch block is present, then the
patient should be evaluated as an ST-elevation myocardial infarction. NSTEMI, therefore, encompasses a
broad spectrum of ischemic injury to the myocardium, which is detected by elevation of troponin.[2] It can be
distinguished from unstable angina pectoris, a condition in which troponin is not elevated.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
Cardiovascular disease is the number one cause of death worldwide, accounting for an estimated 17.9
million deaths per year.[6]
Coronary heart disease mortality is decreasing in many developed countries, but is increasing in developing
and transitional countries, partly as a result of increasing longevity, urbanization, and lifestyle changes. In
the US, it is estimated that >780,000 people will experience an acute coronary syndrome each year, and
approximately 70% of these will have NSTEMI.[2]
Retrospective data from 2010 to 2016 showed that in-hospital mortality in the US was higher in females with
NSTEMI than in males (4.8% compared with 3.9%, based on unadjusted data). This difference in mortality
remained after controlling for age, comorbidities, and hospital factors.[7]
Studies have shown an increase in NSTEMI incidence over time.[8] [9] [10] [11] This is likely due to the
advent of more sensitive assays for myocardial injury, earlier pharmacotherapy, and reperfusion (and
prevention) of STEMI.[3] [8] However, epidemiologic studies across Europe reported reductions in hospital
admissions for NSTEMI during the COVID-19 pandemic (covering the period February-June 2020).[12][13]
[14]
Etiology
The classic mechanism of ST-elevation myocardial infarction (MI) is complete occlusion (typically thrombosis
or embolism) of a coronary artery. In contrast, NSTEMI is usually a result of a transient or near-complete
occlusion of a coronary artery or acute factor that deprives myocardium of oxygen.
Unstable plaques have soft, lipid-laden contents, with thin, often sclerotic fibrous caps infiltrated by
macrophages (foam cells). Release of the lipid-rich atherogenic core causes adhesion, activation, and
aggregation of platelets. This initiates the coagulation cascade. A superimposed thrombus forms, occluding
the coronary blood flow and resulting in myocardial ischemia causing a type 1 MI.[15]
NSTEMI may also be caused by other mechanisms, such as dynamic obstruction (i.e., focal coronary
artery spasm or Prinzmetal angina), severe progressive atherosclerosis, restenosis following percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI), recreational drug use (e.g., cocaine or other stimulants), arterial inflammation, or
extrinsic causes leading to myocardial supply-demand mismatch (i.e., type 2 MI precipitated by acute blood
loss in a patient with underlying coronary artery disease).[2]
Pathophysiology
NSTEMI is a result of an acute imbalance between myocardial oxygen demand and supply, most commonly
due to a reduction in myocardial perfusion. Type 1 myocardial infarction (MI) is most commonly caused by
a nonocclusive thrombus that develops in a disrupted atherosclerotic plaque, and leads to nonocclusive or
near-complete thrombosis of a vessel supplying the myocardium.
Several different sequences of events may lead to an NSTEMI:
• Plaque rupture with superimposed nonocclusive thrombus or embolic events leading to coronary
vascular obstruction
• Dynamic obstruction, such as in vasospasm
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Theory
• Progressive luminal narrowing (i.e., chronic arterial narrowing from restenosis)
• Inflammatory mechanisms (i.e., vasculitis)
• Extrinsic factors leading to poor coronary perfusion (such as hypotension, hypovolemia, or hypoxia).
The most common cause is plaque rupture or obstructive atherosclerotic disease. In this setting, the release
of myocardial biomarkers in type 1 MI is thought to be due to atherosclerotic plaque fissuring or rupture with
resulting intracoronary thrombus or platelet emboli leading to diminished myocardial blood flow.
Plaque rupture usually occurs at the weakest and thinnest part of the atherosclerotic cap (often at the
shoulder region). Ruptured plaques contain large numbers of inflammatory cells including monocytes,
macrophages, and T lymphocytes.[15] [16] Although one third of occlusions occur at a site with the greatest
stenosis, most (66% to 78%) arise from lesions with <50% stenosis, and <5% arise from lesions exhibiting
>70% stenosis.[16] Approximately 25% of patients with a diagnosis of NSTEMI have a 100% occlusion of the
affected artery on coronary angiography.[17] 
The severity of myocardial damage in NSTEMI depends on:
• Duration of ischemia and time to reperfusion
• Extent of underlying atherosclerosis
• Presence of collateral blood flow to the affected region (reserve blood flow)
• Diameter of affected coronary vessel
• Degree of occlusion
• Presence of other comorbidities (i.e., diabetes, renal failure, or hypertension).
Classification
Myocardial infarction redefined[3] [4] [5]
The development of myocardial tissue-specific biomarkers and sensitive cardiac imaging techniques
allows for early detection of very small amounts of myocardial injury or necrosis. Consequently, myocardial
infarction (MI) has been redefined to encompass any necrosis in the setting of myocardial ischemia by any of
the following possible etiologies. MI can be broken down into five different subtypes.
• Type 1: spontaneous MI caused by a pathologic process in the wall of the coronary artery with or
without underlying coronary artery disease (e.g., plaque rupture). Presentations are consistent with
acute coronary syndrome-type symptoms.
• Type 2: MI secondary to an increase in oxygen demand or decrease in supply (i.e., imbalance caused
by severe anemia or hypotension; also includes dynamic coronary artery spasm).
• Type 3: sudden unexpected cardiac death before cardiac biomarkers obtained.
• Type 4a: MI associated with percutaneous coronary intervention.
• Type 4b: MI associated with stent thrombosis.
• Type 4c: MI associated with restenosis.
• Type 5: MI associated with coronary bypass graft surgery.
Criteria required to meet the definition for acute MI (types 1, 2, and 3) include:[4]
1. Acute myocardial injury with clinical evidence of acute myocardial ischemia and with detection of a rise
and/or fall of cardiac troponin values with at least one value above the 99th percentile upper reference
limit (URL) and at least one of the following:
• Ischemic symptoms
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Theory
THEORY
• New, or presumed new, ECG changes indicative of ischemia (left bundle branch block, ST
elevation or depression)
• Development of pathologic Q waves on the ECG
• Myocardial necrosis or regional wall motion abnormality evidenced by cardiac imaging
• Intracoronary thrombus detected on angiography or autopsy.
2. Pathologic findings of an acute MI.
The term "myocardial injury" is used when there is evidence of elevated cardiac troponin values with at least
one value above the 99th percentile URL. The myocardial injury is considered acute if there is a rise and/or
fall of cardiac troponin values.[4]
There has been ongoing controversy in the literature and in clinical practice about distinguishing between
type 1 and type 2 MI. Type 1 MI occur spontaneously and are associated with symptoms of acute coronary
syndrome, typically have more significant elevations in troponin levels than type 2 MI, and are associated
with acute coronary arterial processes such as plaque rupture/ulceration/dissection noted at coronary
angiography. Type 2 MI are usually associated with elevated myocardial oxygen demand or decreased
myocardial blood flow such as occurs with tachycardia or hypotension. Troponin is elevated in type 2
MI, although not as elevated as in type 1 injuries. Although coronary artery disease may be present on
angiogram, there is absence of acute pathology. Cardiomyocyte injury with elevated cardiac troponins may
also occur with conditions other than MI.[5]
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS)[2]
ACS is a term used to describe a range of conditions resulting from sudden reduction in coronary blood
flow. Symptoms should be present suggestive of angina or anginal equivalent presentation. The presence
or absence of ST-segment elevation on presenting ECG indicates ST-elevation MI or non-ST-elevation
acute coronary syndrome (NSTE-ACS). NSTE-ACS is further sub-divided into NSTEMI or unstable angina,
depending on elevation of troponin.
1. ST-elevation MI (STEMI): ECG demonstrates ST elevation of >1 mm in ≥2 anatomically contiguous
leads, usually associated by location. Repolarization abnormalities often evolve over time from
hyperacute T waves to ST elevation to T-wave inversion to the development of Q waves. STEMI
patients typically have a rise and fall of serum cardiac biomarkers. While biomarkers are useful for
confirmatory and prognostic purposes, they are not required for the diagnosis of STEMI and should
not delay treatment. Clinicians must be careful to recognize other causes of ST elevation that mimic
a STEMI. These include left ventricular hypertrophy, left bundle-branch block, paced rhythm, benign
early repolarization, pericarditis, and hyperkalemia.
2. NSTEMI: ECG does not show persistent ST elevation, but may show ischemic changes such as ST
depression or T-wave inversion. The ECG may also be normal. Serum levels of cardiac biomarkers are
elevated.
3. Unstable angina pectoris: cardiac biomarkers are normal.
Case history
Case history #1
A 69-year-old man develops worsening substernal chest pressure after shoveling snow in the morning
before work. He tells his wife he feels a squeezing pain that is radiating to his jaw and left shoulder. He
appears anxious and his wife calls for an ambulance, as he is distressed and sweating profusely. Past
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Theory
medical history is significant for hypertension and he has been told by his doctor that he has borderline
diabetes. On examination in the emergency department he is very anxious and diaphoretic. His heart rate
is 112 bpm and blood pressure is 159/93 mmHg. The ECG is significant for ST depression in the anterior
leads. Three doses of sublingual nitroglycerin provide little relief.
Other presentations
Presentations of myocardial infarction (MI) can be diverse. Some patients do not have any chest
discomfort, whereas others may experience classic "crushing" or severe pain. It is important to recognize
that nonclassic presentations such as dyspnea, syncope, palpitations, isolated nausea/vomiting,
abdominal pain, and fatigue can indicate acute coronary syndrome. These presentations are more
common in women, older people, people with diabetes, those with chronic kidney disease, and cardiac
transplant recipients. A feeling of indigestion may be the only symptom and occurs more often with inferior
wall MI. Highly specific presentations include substernal pressure/discomfort, which may radiate to the
arm, neck, and shoulder, associated with diaphoresis and anxiety.[2] Some patients present with jaw,
neck, ear, arm, or epigastric pain only. These symptoms should be considered equivalent to angina if they
are clearly related to stress or exertion, or are quickly relieved by nitroglycerin or physical rest. A sharp,
stabbing pain or pain reproducible on palpation does not exclude acute coronary syndrome.[2]
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Approach
Patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome (ACS) require urgent evaluation. It is essential to establish
whether the symptoms are a manifestation of an ACS and, if so, how likely it is for an adverse clinical event
to occur.[2] Physicians need to first establish the patient's risk and follow current guidelines according to the
initial risk assessment to choose an appropriate management strategy. The initial risk assessment includes
the history, examination, ECG, and cardiac biomarkers.[2] [5] [55]
ECG
ECG is indicated as the first-line investigation in all patients. A 12-lead ECG should be performed and
interpreted within 10 minutes of the patient arriving at the emergency facility.[56] It is critical to immediate
management to exclude ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). NSTEMI is indistinguishable from
other types of ACS (STEMI or unstable angina) until ECG and biomarkers become available, because
their pathophysiology and presentation are similar.[2] Typical ECG findings may be present, but many
patients have a normal ECG at presentation and therefore serial ECGs, initially at 15- to 30-minute
intervals, should be performed to detect the potential for development of ST-segment elevation or
depression. Where present, ECG findings in NSTEMI may be highly variable. Typically >1 mm of ST
depression is present in 2 or more contiguous leads. Other potential findings include dramatic new T-wave
inversions (Wellens waves) or transient ST elevation. ECG changes of ST elevation or new left bundle
branch block should be evaluated as STEMI.
ECG showing ST depression
From the personal collection of Dr Syed W. Yusuf and Dr Iyad N. Daher,
Department of Cardiology, University of Texas, Houston; used with permission
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
ECG showing ST depression
From the personal collection of Dr Syed W. Yusuf and Dr Iyad N. Daher,
Department of Cardiology, University of Texas, Houston; used with permission
Continuous 12-lead ECG monitoring is a reasonable alternative to serial 12-lead recordings in patients
whose initial ECG is nondiagnostic.[2] Supplemental ECG leads V7 through V9 may be useful in patients
with nondiagnostic initial ECGs to rule out myocardial infarction (MI) due to left circumflex occlusion,
and V3R and V4R may be useful to detect right ventricular MI.[5] Less commonly, the ECG may reveal a
tachyarrhythmia or bradyarrhythmia precipitated by the MI.
History and examination
Patients presenting with chest pain or discomfort need immediate assessment for current or past history
of coronary artery disease (CAD) and traditional risk factors (e.g., age, sex, diabetes, hypertension,
cocaine use) to triage them as high priority.[2] ACS is highly likely if there is a history of chest or left arm
pain similar to previously documented angina pain, and a history of CAD (including MI). Angina pain
is typically deep, poorly localized chest or arm pain described as a sensation of tightness, heaviness,
aching, burning, pressure, or squeezing. The pain is most often retrosternal and can often radiate to the
left arm, but may also radiate to the lower jaw, neck, both arms, back, and epigastrium, where it may
mimic heartburn. It is associated with exertion or emotional stress (or less commonly with cold exposure)
and relieved by rest.[2] [57]
Diaphoresis is a common associated symptom. Shortness of breath is also common and is probably
secondary to diminished cardiac output, but may also be due to underlying pulmonary congestion.
Patients may express anxiety or appear anxious. They may also report a feeling of impending doom.
Classically, events peak in the early morning hours, presumably due to hemodynamic stress caused by
increased serum cortisol, adrenergic hormones, and platelet aggregation.
Patients may present with a range of nonclassic symptoms, any of which may be the sole presenting
symptom. These include weakness, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and syncope. These are more
common in women, older people, and those with diabetes or chronic kidney disease. Examination
findings are usually nonspecific but may reveal hypertension or hypotension, the presence of third and
fourth heart sounds, and paradoxical splitting of the second heart sound. Signs of heart failure (raised
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
jugular venous pressure, bilateral crepitations on auscultation of the lungs) or cardiogenic shock may also
be present, and these signify a worse prognosis.
Relief of chest pain with sublingual nitroglycerin is not necessarily diagnostic of myocardial ischemia and
should not be used as a diagnostic criterion; other entities (e.g., esophageal spasm) may demonstrate
a comparable response.[57] Pain described as sharp, fleeting (few seconds duration), or related
to inspiration (pleuritic) or position, or which is shifting in location, suggests a lower likelihood of
ischemia.[57]
Initial tests (non-ECG)
In addition to the ECG, the following tests must also be performed in all patients.
• Cardiac troponins: a rise in the levels of cardiac troponins (>99th percentile of normal) are
diagnostic for the condition and the use of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin assays have shortened
the assessment time interval.[56] The 0 hour/1 hour algorithm (where a high-sensitive cardiac
troponin measurement is made at presentation [0 hours] and at 1 hour after presentation) is
recommended, or the 0 hour/2 hour algorithm may be used as a second-best option when using
high-sensitivity assays. As an alternative, the 0 hour/ 3 hour algorithm may be considered.
Additional testing after 3 hours is recommended if the first two cardiac troponin measurements
of the 0 hour/1 hour algorithm are not conclusive and the clinical condition is still suggestive of
ACS.[5] This test is readily available at most institutions. Cardiac troponins are more sensitive
and specific markers of cardiomyocyte damage than creatine kinase (CK), its myocardial band
isoenzyme (CK-MB), and myoglobin. In patients with MI, troponin levels rise rapidly (usually within
1 hour from symptom onset if using high-sensitivity assays) and remain elevated for several days.
Therefore, with the advent of high-sensitive troponin assays (hs-cTn), other biomarkers (e.g.,
CK, CK-MB, and myoglobin) are no longer needed for diagnostic purposes. Similarly, for initial
diagnostic purposes, routine measurement of additional biomarkers (e.g., heart-type fatty acid-
binding protein [h-FABP] or copeptin) is not recommended in addition to hs-cTn.[5]
• Echocardiography: cardiac ultrasound may be useful for early triage of patients with suspected
MI.[4] An urgent echocardiogram should always be performed in hemodynamically unstable
patients.[5] [58] It can also be performed initially when a strong clinical suspicion of acute coronary
syndrome is present and ECG is normal or inconclusive, to evaluate ischemic complications and
other causes of chest pain (i.e., pulmonary embolism, pericardial effusion/tamponade, or acute
valvular pathology).[4]
• Patients with a high index of suspicion who have negative serial ECGs and cardiac enzymes
should be closely monitored in a telemetry or chest pain unit, as it may take time for cardiac
markers to rise.[2] 
• Chest x-ray: indicated to determine whether congestive heart failure (CHF) is present and to
exclude noncardiac causes for chest pain.[56]
• CBC: hemoglobin and hematocrit measurements may help to evaluate a secondary cause of
NSTEMI (e.g., acute blood loss, anemia) and to evaluate thrombocytopenia to estimate risk of
bleeding.
• BUN and serum creatinine: creatinine clearance should be estimated in NSTEMI patients and the
doses of renally cleared drugs should be adjusted appropriately. In chronic kidney disease patients
undergoing angiography, iso-osmolar contrast agents may be preferred.[2] [59]
• Serum electrolytes: electrolyte derangements may predispose to cardiac arrhythmias.
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
• Liver function tests: useful if treatment with drugs that undergo hepatic metabolism is considered.
Impaired liver function tests may also suggest hepatic congestion in patients with concomitant heart
failure.
• Blood glucose levels: hyperglycemia is common in the setting of acute MI, with or without a history
of diabetes.[60] There is controversy over whether tight glucose control may reduce risk of death
and morbidity.[61]
Risk stratification
ACS management requires continuous risk stratification for death or recurrent MI. The American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association recommend that patients with suspected ACS are risk stratified
based on the likelihood of ACS and adverse outcome(s) to further triage and assist in the selection
of treatment options, particularly in settings where high-sensitivity cardiac troponin assays are not
available.[2] [57] Several risk scores exist that incorporate a number of variables such as clinical history,
angina symptoms and equivalents, physical exam, ECG, renal function, and troponin levels. These
variables can be used to estimate the risk of death and nonfatal cardiac ischemic events: for example,
using the TIMI risk score or the Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) risk model.[2] [62]
The TIMI risk score is composed of 7 risk indicators rated on presentation. One point is awarded for the
presence of each of the following criteria:
• Age >65 years
• Presence of ≥3 CAD risk factors
• Prior coronary stenosis >50%
• ST-segment deviation on ECG
• Elevated serum cardiac biomarkers
• At least 2 anginal episodes in the past 24 hours
• Use of aspirin in the past 7 days.
Patients with a TIMI score of 0 to 2 are low risk, 3 to 4 are intermediate risk, and 5 to 7 are high risk. All-
cause mortality, rate of MI, and rate of urgent revascularization at 14 days increase in proportion to the
number of risk factors present on the TIMI score.
The GRACE risk model is a web-based tool that can be used to predict in-hospital and post-discharge
mortality or MI in patients following an initial ACS.
The Killip classification is another tool that can be used for risk stratification. This classification system risk
stratifies patients with acute MI based on clinical evidence of left ventricular failure:
• Class I: no evidence of CHF
• Class II: presence of a third heart sound gallop, basilar rales, or elevated jugular venous pressure
• Class III: presence of pulmonary edema
• Class IV: cardiogenic shock.
The HEART Score incorporates elements of the patient’s history, ECG, age, risk factors, and troponin
and is used for patients in the emergency room setting to assess risk of acute MI, percutaneous coronary
intervention, coronary artery bypass graft (CABG), and death within 6 weeks of initial presentation.[63]
Subsequent tests
Following initial workup and risk stratification, a range of additional investigations may be considered.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
• Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-pro-BNP): measurement of BNP or
NT-pro-BNP may be considered to supplement assessment of global risk in patients with suspected
ACS, particularly cardiogenic shock associated with MI type 1.[2] [5]
• Lipid profile: this test is indicated in the first 24 hours of admission to the hospital to assess for lipid
abnormalities and therefore the need for any lipid-lowering therapy.
• Angiography: urgent and immediate angiography is indicated if patients do not stabilize with
intensive medical treatment.[2] [64] Indications include recurrent symptoms (refractory angina),
ischemia despite adequate medical treatment, high risk (e.g., CHF, malignant ventricular
arrhythmias), or noninvasive test findings (significant left ventricular dysfunction, ejection fraction
<0.35, large anterior or multiple perfusion defects). Patients with a history of anaphylaxis or allergy
to contrast must be premedicated prior to angiography.
64-slice CT angiography (A) and conventional angiography (B) showing
a high-grade lesion in the mid-right coronary artery, indicated by the
arrows. The arrowheads show artifacts that may be mistaken for lesions
From: Schussler JM and Grayburn PA. Heart. 2007 Mar;93(3):290-7
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
64-slice CT angiography of a patient with stable angina showing 3D reconstruction
(A), curved reformatted images (B) and confirmation of a high-grade lesion on
conventional angiography (C). The arrowheads show calcified plaques. Dx= diagnosis
From: Schussler JM and Grayburn PA. Heart. 2007 Mar;93(3):290-7
• Stress testing: stress testing, including treadmill exercise testing, may be useful and is
recommended in low and intermediate pretest probability with a normal ECG and normal high
sensitivity biomarkers to assist with guiding the need for an invasive strategy.[2] [65] [66] The
sensitivity and specificity of these tests increase when combined with either nuclear imaging to look
for myocardial perfusion defects or echocardiography to assess wall motion abnormalities. The
key positive finding on nuclear imaging stress tests is the presence of a reversible defect. This is
an area of myocardium that becomes deprived of perfusion during increased myocardial demand
and reperfuses on stopping the activity. This signifies stenosis within the coronary circulation that
may be treated with percutaneous coronary intervention or CABG. Submaximal exercise testing
can be performed at 4 to 7 days after myocardial infarction, while symptom limited testing can be
performed at 14 to 21 days post-myocardial infarction, when the patient has been free of active
ischemic or heart failure symptoms.[67]
• Coronary CT angiography (CCTA): this may provide noninvasive evaluation of coronary anatomy
and atherosclerosis. Renal failure is a relative contraindication. Patients with contrast allergy may
be premedicated prior to angiography.[68] Due to the high negative predictive value of CCTA,
evidence suggests that CCTA is useful in patients with low to moderate risk of NSTEMI. When
compared with the standard care of low-risk patients (observation, serial enzymes followed by
stress testing) CCTA reduced time to diagnosis, reduced length of emergency department stay, and
had similar safety.[69] CCTA is not indicated for patients with high-risk features (i.e., ischemic ECG
changes, positive cardiac markers).[70]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
64-slice CT angiography of a patient with stable angina showing 3D reconstruction
(A), curved reformatted images (B) and confirmation of a high-grade lesion on
conventional angiography (C). The arrowheads show calcified plaques. Dx= diagnosis
From: Schussler JM and Grayburn PA. Heart. 2007 Mar;93(3):290-7
64-slice CT angiography (A) and conventional angiography (B) showing
a high-grade lesion in the mid-right coronary artery, indicated by the
arrows. The arrowheads show artifacts that may be mistaken for lesions
From: Schussler JM and Grayburn PA. Heart. 2007 Mar;93(3):290-7
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
chest pain (common)
• The most common symptom of NSTEMI is chest pain or discomfort. Described as a sensation of
tightness, heaviness, aching, burning, pressure, or squeezing.
• The pain is most often retrosternal and can often radiate to the left arm but may also radiate to the
lower jaw, neck, both arms, back, and epigastrium, where it may mimic heartburn.[2] [16]
diaphoresis (common)
• Classic sign or symptom of acute MI.
Other diagnostic factors
shortness of breath (common)
• Dyspnea is frequent and is probably secondary to diminished cardiac output, but may also be due to
underlying pulmonary congestion.
• Frank congestive heart failure, jugular venous distension, pulmonary edema, and cardiogenic shock
can be present, and patients who present with these are at high risk for a poor outcome.[2]
weakness (common)
• More common presentation in women, older people, and those with diabetes.
anxiety (common)
• Patients may express anxiety or appear anxious. They may also report a feeling of impending doom.
nausea and vomiting (common)
• May be the only symptom.
• Nonclassic symptoms are more common in women, older people, and those with diabetes.
abdominal pain (common)
• May be the only symptom.
• Atypical symptoms are more common in women, older people, and those with diabetes.
hypertension (common)
• Patients may have underlying hypertension. In some cases it reflects excessive sympathetic activity.
early morning onset (uncommon)
• Events peak at early hours of the morning, presumably due to hemodynamic stress caused by
increased serum cortisol, adrenergic hormones, and platelet aggregation.
syncope (uncommon)
• May be the only symptom.
• More common in women, older people, and those with diabetes.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
hypotension (uncommon)
• Depends on extent and location of infarction.
arrhythmias (uncommon)
• Presence of palpitations or tachy- or bradyarrhythmias.
abnormal heart sounds (uncommon)
• Presence of third and fourth heart sounds and paradoxical splitting of the second heart sound.
Risk factors
Strong
atherosclerosis (history of angina, myocardial infarction, stroke, transient
ischemic attack, peripheral vascular disease)
• Atherosclerotic heart disease is the underlying mechanism in coronary artery disease (CAD). It
evolves over decades and can begin in childhood. One study found intimal lesions in the aorta
in all those ages 15 to 19 years, and in the right coronary artery in more than half of those of this
age.[18] Atherosclerosis is typically silent until an acute event occurs (e.g., acute coronary syndrome).
A sedentary lifestyle, excess caloric intake, and cigarette smoking are strongly associated with
atherosclerosis.
• In an acute setting, the presence or absence of the traditional risk factors for CAD are not specific or
sensitive for diagnosing NSTEMI. However, they do appear to be important in determining prognosis in
acute coronary syndrome and targeting secondary prevention strategies.[2]
diabetes
• Patients with diabetes mellitus are at increased risk of coronary artery disease (CAD). The
mechanisms are not fully known but they may reflect vascular abnormalities of inflammation, obesity,
hypertension, dyslipidemia, and hypercoagulability.
• Approximately 20% to 25% of all patients with NSTEMI have diabetes, and CAD accounts for 75%
of all deaths in the diabetic population.[2] [19] Diabetes is associated with more extensive CAD,
unstable lesions, and less favorable long-term outcomes (death, myocardial infarction, acute coronary
syndrome re-admission), as well as with coronary revascularization, especially percutaneous coronary
intervention.[2]
smoking
• Smoking is the second leading cause of death in the US.[20] Overall mortality among US smokers is
3 times higher than for people who have never smoked.[21] Cigarette smokers are substantially more
likely than nonsmokers to develop coronary artery disease (CAD) and to have a stroke.[22] Smoking
increases risk for CAD by direct promotion of atherosclerosis, reduced oxygen delivery in the blood,
increased thrombogenesis, and direct coronary artery spasm.
• Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke also significantly increases risk for heart disease.[23]
• One report on the public health consequences of e-cigarettes by the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine found that, in addition to nicotine, most e-cigarette products contain and
emit numerous potentially toxic substances.[24] There is growing evidence to suggest that e-cigarettes
and the aerosol constituents have a negative effect on the cardiovascular system.[25]
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
dyslipidemia
• Cholesterol is a main constituent of advanced atherosclerotic plaques. Western diet, excess calorie
intake, and sedentary lifestyle are the strongest contributors to dyslipidemia. Large epidemiologic
studies have firmly identified an increased risk of myocardial infarction (MI) with serum lipid
abnormalities (mainly increased low-density lipoproteins [LDL], elevated triglycerides, and decreased
high-density lipoproteins).[26] [27] LDL levels have the strongest relationship.
• Lipid-lowering therapy reduces future ischemic events and limits disease progression.[28] Lower LDL
levels highly correlate with reduction of death from MI or recurrent acute coronary syndrome.[29]
family history of premature coronary artery disease (CAD)
• Defined as premature coronary artery disease in family members (men <55 years; women <65 years).
Family history includes a first-degree relative with a history of myocardial infarction, sudden cardiac
death, aortic dissection, percutaneous coronary intervention, or coronary artery bypass graft. Inherited
(primary) disorders of lipoprotein metabolism are an important cause. On physical exam, patients may
have eruptive xanthomas, lipemia retinalis (lipid accumulation within retinal vessels), or tendinous
xanthomas. In the acute setting of NSTEMI, presence or absence of family history does not help in
treatment, but presence of family history increases the probability of NSTEMI, and is associated with
an increased risk of 30-day cardiac events in patients with acute coronary syndrome.[2]
age >65 years
• Nearly 60% of people admitted to the hospital with NSTEMI as the primary diagnosis are >65 years
of age.[30] Between 1990-1999, the mean age of NSTEMI patients rose from 65-68 years.[8] Older
patients have increased risks of underlying coronary artery disease (CAD) and multiple-vessel
CAD.[31] They are at higher risk than younger patients for an adverse outcome.[2]
hypertension
• A major risk factor for poor outcomes in patients with acute coronary syndrome.[2] Hypertension is
one of the most prevalent risk factors for coronary artery disease in the US.[32] Effective treatment
of hypertension dramatically reduces the risk of cerebrovascular events, heart failure, and future
myocardial infarction.[32] High blood pressure induces ventricular hypertrophy and endothelial
dysfunction/damage, and promotes atherosclerosis, all of which predispose patients to cardiac events. 
obesity and metabolic syndrome phenotype
• Excess calorie intake increases low-density lipoproteins, total cholesterol, and triglyceride levels.
Obesity and the metabolic phenotype (abdominal obesity with known history of hyperlipidemia,
hypertension, and insulin resistance) predispose to coronary artery disease.[33] [34] [35] Waist
circumference is an indicator of intra-abdominal fat, and a high waist circumference is associated with
an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, independent of body mass index.[36] Imaging studies
have shown an association between higher levels of intra-abdominal fat and excess fat deposition
within the liver.[37] The clinical counterpart of this is nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, which is a risk
factor for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.[38] Cardiac output and blood volume increase to
supply the vascular-rich adipose tissue. Obesity is associated with diastolic dysfunction and is a strong
stimulus for left ventricular hypertrophy.[34] Adipokines and other hormones secreted by adipose
tissue are highly linked to inflammation and atherosclerosis.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
physical inactivity
• The relative risk of coronary artery disease (CAD) associated with physical inactivity ranges from
1.5 to 2.4, an increase comparable to that for high cholesterol, high blood pressure, and cigarette
smoking.[39] Physical activity has antiatherosclerotic, psychological, antithrombotic, anti-ischemic,
and antiarrhythmic effects that are important in primary and secondary prevention of CAD.[32] [40]
Regular exercise increases cardiorespiratory fitness and lowers myocardial oxygen demand. This
correlates with lower mortality, and reduced risk of CAD and morbidity from NSTEMI.[41] Sustained,
regular physical activity lowers blood pressure, reduces lipid levels, reduces adiposity, increases
insulin sensitivity, and decreases inflammation, stress, and adrenergic activity.[40]
cocaine use
• Data suggest that cocaine accounts for up to 25% of acute myocardial infarctions (MI) in people ages
18 to 45 years.[42] The lifetime risk of nonfatal MI with cocaine use is 7 times the risk in nonusers.[43]
In the hour after cocaine is used, the risk of MI is 24 times the baseline risk.[44] It is probably due to
cocaine-induced coronary vasospasm and thrombosis, in addition to a direct effect on heart rate and
arterial pressure. Cocaine also has direct myocardial toxic properties.[2]
depression
• An independent predictor of future myocardial infarction in otherwise healthy people.[45] [46]
stent thrombosis or restenosis
• Stent thrombosis or in-stent restenosis may cause ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI),
NSTEMI, or unstable angina. Both stent thrombosis and restenosis have complex causes, triggers,
pathophysiology, and risk factors. Of importance, premature cessation of antiplatelet agents in patients
with stents (drug-eluting and bare-metal) may trigger an acute coronary syndrome.[47]
chronic kidney disease
• Patients with chronic kidney disease have increased risk of NSTEMI and worsened prognosis following
an NSTEMI.[48]
surgical procedures (including intraoperative and postoperative periods)
• NSTEMI is a relatively common complication of all types of surgical and nonsurgical procedures. Type
of surgery, patient risk factors, and prior patient history are important contributors to postoperative
NSTEMI. Often this is detected as a rise in cardiac markers in the days following the surgical
procedure. Preoperative risk assessment and additional steps to reduce the risk of myocardial
ischemia/stress may prevent this complication or enable early recognition and therapy.[49]
sleep apnea
• Untreated moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) has been associated with a 17%
increase in relative risk of cardiovascular events compared to risk in patients without OSA.[50]
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
ECG
• A 12-lead ECG should be performed and interpreted within 10
minutes of the patient's arrival in the emergency facility.[56]
 Classic ECG findings of ischemia in NSTEMI include horizontal or
downsloping ST depression >1.0 mm and/or symmetrically inverted T
waves (Wellens waves).
ECG showing ST depression
From the personal collection of Dr Syed W. Yusuf
and Dr Iyad N. Daher, Department of Cardiology,
University of Texas, Houston; used with permission
ECG showing ST depression
From the personal collection of Dr Syed W. Yusuf
and Dr Iyad N. Daher, Department of Cardiology,
University of Texas, Houston; used with permission
• In many patients the ECG may be normal and in some patients there
may be transient ST elevation.
• Serial ECGs, initially at 15- to 30-minute intervals, then per provider
discretion, should be taken in patients with chest pain, to detect
nonspecific ST-T wave
changes or ischemic
changes
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
development of ST-elevation myocardial infarction (MI), or to help
guide reperfusion strategies.[2]
• Continuous 12-lead ECG monitoring is a reasonable alternative
to serial 12-lead recordings in patients whose initial ECG is
nondiagnostic.[2]
• Supplemental ECG leads V7 through V9 may be useful in patients
with nondiagnostic initial ECGs to rule out MI due to left circumflex
occlusion, and V3R and V4R may be useful to detect right ventricular
MI.[5]
cardiac biomarkers
• Troponin levels confirm the diagnosis of infarction.[56] Test is the best
marker for musculoskeletal injury, small myocardial infarction (MI), or
late (>2-3 days) MI.
• The 99th percentile is the cutoff value used to determine acute MI.
• The 0 hour/1 hour algorithm (where a high-sensitive cardiac troponin
measurement is made at presentation [0 hours] and at 1 hour after
presentation) is recommended, or the 0 hour/2 hour algorithm may
be used as a second-best option when using high-sensitivity assays.
As an alternative, the 0 hour/ 3 hour algorithm may be considered.
Additional testing after 3 hours is recommended if the first two
cardiac troponin measurements of the 0 hour/1 hour algorithm
are not conclusive and the clinical condition is still suggestive of
ACS.[5] This test is readily available at most institutions. Cardiac
troponins are more sensitive and specific markers of cardiomyocyte
damage than creatine kinase (CK), its myocardial band isoenzyme
(CK-MB), and myoglobin. In patients with MI, troponin levels rise
rapidly (usually within 1 hour from symptom onset if using high-
sensitivity assays) and remain elevated for several days. Therefore,
with the advent of high-sensitive troponin assays (hs-cTn), other
biomarkers (e.g., CK, CK-MB, and myoglobin) are no longer needed
for diagnostic purposes. Similarly, for initial diagnostic purposes,
routine measurement of additional biomarkers (e.g., heart-type fatty
acid-binding protein [h-FABP] or copeptin) is not recommended in
addition to hs-cTn.[5]
• Other conditions that may cause elevated cardiac biomarkers include
trauma, renal failure, congestive heart failure, surgery, inflammatory
states, pulmonary embolism, sepsis, burns, rhabdomyolysis, and
drug toxicity.[71]
>99th percentile of normal
echocardiography
• Cardiac ultrasound may be useful for early triage of patients with
suspected myocardial infarction.[4] An urgent echocardiogram should
always be performed in hemodynamically unstable patients.[5]
[58] It can also be performed initially when a strong clinical suspicion
of acute coronary syndrome is present and ECG is normal or
inconclusive, to evaluate ischemic complications and other causes
of chest pain (i.e., pulmonary embolism, pericardial effusion/
tamponade, or acute valvular pathology).[4] 
regional wall motion
abnormality, depressed
left ventricular function,
or decreased ejection
fraction
CBC
• Hemoglobin and hematocrit measurements may help to evaluate a
secondary cause of NSTEMI (e.g., acute blood loss, anemia) and to
evaluate thrombocytopenia to estimate risk of bleeding.
normal, anemia,
thrombocytopenia
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
Test Result
BUN and serum creatinine
• Creatinine clearance should be estimated in NSTEMI patients and
the doses of renally cleared drugs should be adjusted appropriately.
In chronic kidney disease patients undergoing angiography, iso-
osmolar contrast agents may be preferred.[2] [59]
normal or elevated
electrolytes
• Electrolyte derangements may predispose to cardiac arrhythmias.
normal or deranged
LFTs
• Useful if considering treatment with drugs that undergo hepatic
metabolism.
• Impaired LFTs may also suggest hepatic congestion in patients with
concomitant heart failure.
normal
blood glucose
• Hyperglycemia is common in the setting of acute myocardial
infarction, with or without a history of diabetes.[60] There is
controversy over whether tight glucose control may reduce risk of
death and morbidity.[61]
normal or elevated
chest x-ray
• Pneumonia, esophageal rupture, aortic dissection, and
pneumothorax can mimic cardiac ischemia and may be diagnosed
with a chest x-ray.[2] [56]
normal or may show
pulmonary edema
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Other tests to consider
Test Result
lipids
• Lipid management should include assessment of a fasting lipid
profile for all patients, within 24 hours of admission to the hospital.
Frequently, in the acute phase of an acute coronary syndrome, lipid
values may be lower than normal for that patient.
elevated, normal, or
optimal
brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-pro-
BNP)
• Measurement of BNP or NT-pro-BNP may be considered to
supplement assessment of global risk in patients with suspected
acute coronary syndrome.[2]
>99th percentile of normal
angiography/cardiac catheterization
• Urgent and immediate angiography (without noninvasive risk
stratification) with intensive medical treatment is warranted.[2] [64]
64-slice CT angiography of a patient with stable angina showing
3D reconstruction (A), curved reformatted images (B) and
confirmation of a high-grade lesion on conventional angiography
(C). The arrowheads show calcified plaques. Dx= diagnosis
From: Schussler JM and Grayburn PA. Heart. 2007 Mar;93(3):290-7
severe stenosis or
thrombosis
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
Test Result
64-slice CT angiography (A) and conventional angiography (B) showing
a high-grade lesion in the mid-right coronary artery, indicated by the
arrows. The arrowheads show artifacts that may be mistaken for lesions
From: Schussler JM and Grayburn PA. Heart. 2007 Mar;93(3):290-7
• Indications include recurrent symptoms (refractory angina), ischemia
despite adequate medical treatment, high risk (e.g., congestive
heart failure, malignant ventricular arrhythmias), or noninvasive test
findings (significant left ventricular dysfunction, ejection fraction
<0.35, large anterior or multiple perfusion defects).[2]
• Renal failure is a relative contraindication and patients with contrast
allergy must be premedicated prior to angiography.
stress testing
• Stress testing, including treadmill exercise testing, may be useful
and is recommended in patients with low and intermediate pretest
probability with a normal ECG and normal high sensitivity biomarkers
to assist with assessing need for an invasive strategy.[2] [65] [66]
• The sensitivity and specificity of these tests increase when combined
with either nuclear imaging to look for myocardial perfusion defects or
echocardiography to assess wall motion abnormalities.
• The key positive finding on nuclear imaging stress tests is the
presence of a reversible defect. This is an area of myocardium that
becomes deprived of perfusion during increased myocardial demand
and reperfuses on stopping the activity. This signifies stenosis within
the coronary circulation that may be treated with percutaneous
coronary intervention or coronary artery bypass graft.
• Submaximal exercise testing can be performed at 4-7 days after
myocardial infarction, while symptom limited testing can be performed
at 14-21 days post-myocardial infarction, when the patient has been
free of active ischemic or heart failure symptoms.[67]
ECG: ST-segment
depression >1mm (0.1
mV); nuclear imaging:
reversible or fixed
perfusion defect
coronary CT angiography (CCTA)
• May provide noninvasive evaluation of coronary anatomy and
atherosclerosis. Renal failure is a relative contraindication.
Patients with a contrast allergy should be premedicated prior to
angiography.[68]
occlusion or near-
occlusion
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
64-slice CT angiography (A) and conventional angiography (B) showing
a high-grade lesion in the mid-right coronary artery, indicated by the
arrows. The arrowheads show artifacts that may be mistaken for lesions
From: Schussler JM and Grayburn PA. Heart. 2007 Mar;93(3):290-7
64-slice CT angiography of a patient with stable angina showing
3D reconstruction (A), curved reformatted images (B) and
confirmation of a high-grade lesion on conventional angiography
(C). The arrowheads show calcified plaques. Dx= diagnosis
From: Schussler JM and Grayburn PA. Heart. 2007 Mar;93(3):290-7
• Due to the high negative predictive value of CCTA, evidence
suggests that CCTA is useful in patients with low to moderate risk of
NSTEMI. When compared with the standard care of low-risk patients
(observation, serial enzymes followed by stress testing) CCTA
reduced time to diagnosis, reduced length of emergency department
stay, and had similar safety.[69] CCTA is not indicated for patients
with high-risk features (i.e., ischemic ECG changes, positive cardiac
markers).[70]
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
ST-elevation myocardial
infarction (STEMI)
• Clinical presentation may not
differentiate.
• ECG will show ST-segment
elevation.
• Cardiac biomarkers are
elevated in both NSTEMI
and STEMI.
Unstable angina • Clinical presentation may not
differentiate.
• ECG may show nonspecific
ST-segment and T-wave
changes.
• Cardiac biomarkers are
normal.
Aortic dissection • Pain is described as a
"tearing" back pain. There
may be BP differential
between upper and lower
extremities.
• Aortic dissection often
occurs in patients who have
collagen vascular disease
(i.e., Marfan syndrome).
• Chest CT angiography with
contrast or MR angiography
may show the dissection or
an intimal flap. CXR may
reveal widened mediastinum.
• Transesophageal
echocardiography may show
a dissection depending on
the location.
Pulmonary embolism • Patients often present with
dyspnea, pleuritic chest
pain, cough, or hemoptysis.
Hypoxia may be present.
Lower limbs should be
examined for deep vein
thrombosis (enlarged,
tender, erythematous
calves).
• For patients with a high
probability of pulmonary
embolism (PE) on clinical
scoring (i.e., PE likely)
or an abnormal D-dimer,
imaging is required. The
multiple-detector computed
tomographic pulmonary
angiography (CTPA)
scanning of the chest is the
imaging study of choice for
acute pulmonary embolism.
• For patients with renal
insufficiency or iodinated
contrast allergies, ventilation-
perfusion scan ± peripheral
venous doppler exam are
recommended.
• Chest CT scan may show
central filling defects within
the vascular lumen, sharp
cutoff of the artery, or a
"tram track" appearance of
the artery in nonocclusive
embolism.
Peptic ulcer disease • Pain is described as burning
epigastric pain that occurs
hours after meals or with
hunger. It often wakes
• Endoscopy may show ulcers,
erosion, or gastropathy.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
the patient at night and
is relieved by food and
antacids.
• There may be a previous
history of reflux or
medications that can cause
peptic ulcer (i.e., recent use
of steroid or nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs).
Acute pericarditis • Pain is relieved by sitting
forward. Friction rub or
distant heart sounds may be
heard on auscultation.
• History of a recent cardiac
procedure (Dressler
syndrome), renal failure, or
preceding illness (fever or
diarrhea) may be present.
• ECG may show diffuse ST
elevations (although PR
elevation in aVR is most
specific finding).
• Echocardiogram and
chest CT scan may
show pericardial effusion
or thickening of the
pericardium. Cardiac MRI
is useful and has high
sensitivity for detection
of pericardial effusion,
loculations, and pericardial
thickening.
• Blood tests may indicate
systemic inflammation
(e.g., elevated WBC count,
elevated erythrocyte
sedimentation rate [ESR]
or CRP). Renal failure can
cause uremic pericarditis.
Esophageal spasm • Usually diagnosed after
ruling out other causes of
chest pain. A past history
of esophageal spasm is
typical and there may be a
precipitating event.
• Pain due to esophageal
spasm is often relieved
by nitroglycerin, making it
difficult to differentiate from
cardiac pain.
• The esophagus may have
a corkscrew appearance
on barium swallow. This
represents simultaneous
rings of contraction in the
distal esophagus.[72]
Costochondritis • Diagnosis is made on the
history or exclusion of
other causes. There may
be a history of recent or
repeated trauma. The pain is
typically localized with point
tenderness, sharp in nature,
and relieved by nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs.
• There are no specific studies
or imaging to diagnose
costochondritis.
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Panic attack • Most often diagnosed after
exclusion of other causes.
Patients often have other
psychiatric illness. Women
are affected more than
men. Panic attacks may be
situational.
• No tests or procedures can
diagnose anxiety disorders.
Stable ischemic heart
disease
• Angina pain is recurrent and
reproducible with exertion,
and is relieved by rest or
nitroglycerin.
• Diagnosis is most
often made on history
alone. Coronary artery
catheterization may show the
typical fixed coronary artery
luminal wall narrowing.
• Intravascular ultrasound
during cardiac
catheterization may reveal
the typical stable plaque of
stable angina (calcified, thick
fibrous caps) rather than
the unstable plaques (lipid-
laden, thin caps) that cause
acute coronary syndrome.
Myocarditis • There is a wide spectrum
of presentation from
asymptomatic to cardiogenic
shock. Patients may
present with a history of
recent influenza-like illness
associated with arthralgias
and malaise. Symptoms of
heart failure may be present.
• Myocarditis may be
idiopathic or caused by
infections (viral, bacterial,
or fungal), drugs (e.g.,
chemotherapy agents,
antihypertensives, and
antiepileptics), and
autoimmune disorders
(e.g., systemic lupus
erythematosus, sarcoidosis,
and rheumatoid arthritis).
• The definitive test is
endomyocardial biopsy,
which shows lymphocyte
infiltration and myocyte
necrosis.
• Cardiac enzymes or brain
natriuretic protein may be
elevated.
• Leukocytosis, eosinophilia,
elevated ESR and CRP, and
a rise in serum viral titers are
common.
Acute cholecystitis • On physical exam there
is constant right upper
quadrant pain with or without
Murphy sign (inhibition of
inspiration due to pain on
palpation). There may be
a history of gallstones or
previous episodes of biliary
colic.
• Ultrasound may show a
distended gallbladder and
gallstones.[73] If ECG
changes accompany
cholecystitis, these would
most likely include ST
elevation.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Boerhaave syndrome • Caused by esophageal
rupture with mediastinitis.
It typically follows retching
or vomiting, aggravated
by swallowing. Patients
may have subcutaneous
emphysema and a hoarse
voice.
• CXR shows
pneumomediastinum >90%
of the time. Esophagram
and CT scan can confirm
diagnosis or reveal the
condition. CT may show
pneumomediastinum
and periesophageal air
tracks. Esophagram may
show an esophageal
tear.[74] Endoscopy is not
recommended for Boerhaave
syndrome.
Brugada syndrome • More common in Asian
people and men ages 30 to
50 years. Patients typically
present after an episode
of polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia or a cardiac
arrest.
• ECG shows saddle-shaped
ST elevation in leads V1-
V3. These changes are
associated with complete
or incomplete right bundle-
branch block and T-wave
inversions.
Acute stress
cardiomyopathy
• Clinical features are similar
to NSTEMI and may include
chest pain, shortness of
breath, and left ventricular
wall motion abnormalities.
A characteristic feature is
that often the clinical state
is triggered by a severe
extracardiac stressor (e.g.,
intracranial hemorrhage,
pheochromocytoma,
exogenous catecholamine
administration, severe
emotional stress,
postoperative stress, sepsis).
• Often these patients present
with ECG changes, cardiac
biomarker elevations, and
left ventricular dysfunction
on cardiac imaging that
are indistinguishable from
NSTEMI but on coronary
angiography will have no
obstructive lesion. Coronary
angiography remains the
definitive test for diagnosis of
this condition.
Criteria
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association[2] [4]
The Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction (2018) provides criteria for 5 distinct clinical
presentations of myocardial infarction (MI), which are based on pathological, clinical, and prognostic
factors.[4]
Evaluation begins with clinical history, obtaining an ECG(s), and assessing cardiac biomarkers. It is
important to note that ECG abnormalities and elevated cardiac biomarkers do not alone establish the
definition of NSTEMI. The ECG can be relatively normal but this does not exclude acute coronary syndrome
(ACS). More commonly associated findings in NSTEMI include ST depression, transient ST elevation, and/
or prominent T-wave inversions. While these findings are frequently present, they are not required for a
diagnosis of NSTEMI.
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Diagnosis
If the diagnosis of ACS is indicated by history and ECG, the diagnosis of NSTEMI may be established
if a biomarker of myocardial injury has been released (i.e., troponin elevation). If there is no evidence of
biochemical marker release suggestive of myocardial necrosis in a patient with suspected ACS, they may be
considered to have experienced unstable angina.[2]
Risk stratification scores[2]
ACS diagnosis and management requires continuous risk stratification for death or recurrent MI. Initial risk
assessment includes the history, examination, ECG, and cardiac biomarkers, all of which can be compiled to
estimate risk using the TIMI Risk Score, GRACE risk model, or the Killip Classification.
High-risk clinical features in patients with suspected ACS include ongoing chest pain, severe dyspnea,
syncope/presyncope, or palpitations.
TIMI Risk Score[62]
All-cause mortality, rate of MI, and rate of revascularization at 14 days increase in proportion to the number
of risk factors present on the TIMI score. One point is awarded for the presence of each of the following
criteria (patients with a score of 0-2 are low risk, 3-4 are intermediate risk, and 5-7 are high risk):
• Age >65 years
• Presence of ≥3 coronary artery disease risk factors
• Prior coronary stenosis >50%
• ST-segment deviation on ECG
• Elevated serum cardiac biomarkers
• At least 2 anginal episodes in the past 24 hours
• Use of aspirin in the past 7 days.
Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) risk model
The GRACE risk model is a web-based tool that can be used to predict in-hospital and post-discharge
mortality or MI in patients following an initial ACS.
Killip Classification
The Killip classification risk stratifies patients with acute MI based on clinical evidence of left ventricular
failure.
• Class I: no evidence of congestive heart failure
• Class II: presence of a third heart sound gallop, basilar rales, or elevated jugular venous pressure
• Class III: presence of pulmonary edema
• Class IV: cardiogenic shock.
Heart Score
Incorporates elements of the patient's history, ECG, age, risk factors, and troponin and is used for patients
in the accident and emergency department setting to assess risk of acute MI, percutaneous intervention,
coronary artery bypass graft, and death within 6 weeks of initial presentation.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Approach
The following management approach should be applied to patients with acute coronary syndrome NSTEMI
(type 1 NSTEMI). Ideal treatments of the other types of NSTEMI are currently evolving and are beyond the
scope of this topic.
The aim of initial evaluation is to relieve pain, identify and treat life-threatening instability, and then admit
the patient for further treatment/observation.[2] The goal of treatment is to relieve ischemia, prevent further
thrombosis or embolism, and correct hemodynamic abnormalities. All patients should undergo early risk
estimation based on the medical history, physical exam, ECG findings, and cardiac markers.
Initial management
Initial medical therapy is indicated in all patients, with variation in some choices of agent according to risk
stratification.
Oxygen
All patients require oxygen saturation measurement using pulse oximetry.[2] Guidelines recommend
supplemental oxygen therapy only in patients who are hypoxemic (arterial oxygen saturation <90%), or in
those who have respiratory distress or other high-risk features for hypoxemia.[2] Liberal use of oxygen is
associated with increased mortality in patients with acute coronary syndrome.[75] [76]
Antiplatelet therapy
Aspirin is indicated immediately for all patients suspected of having an acute coronary syndrome
unless contraindicated or already taken.[2] Healthcare personnel providing prehospital emergency
services should similarly give aspirin (chewed) to chest pain patients suspected of having an acute
coronary syndrome, again unless contraindicated or already taken by the patient.[2] Aspirin should be
continued at a daily maintenance dose thereafter.[2] Aspirin, an irreversible COX-1 inhibitor, suppresses
thromboxane A2 production preventing platelet aggregation, and reduces the incidence of death and
nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI) in patients with unstable angina or acute MI.[77] [78] [78] Aspirin
has been shown to achieve a 30% to 51% reduction in future coronary events.[79] High-dose aspirin is
associated with an increased risk of bleeding when compared with low-dose aspirin in the absence of
improved outcomes.[2]
Similarly, P2Y12 inhibitors (e.g., clopidogrel, ticagrelor, prasugrel) are indicated in early hospital medical
treatment of NSTEMI, providing powerful tools against platelet adhesion, activation, and aggregation.
P2Y12 inhibitors can reduce mortality and morbidity, but they are associated with an increased risk of
bleeding.[80] [81] Ticagrelor and prasugrel are newer P2Y12 agents, which trials have shown to have
a faster onset of action and greater efficacy compared with clopidogrel.[2] [82] [83] However, the risk of
bleeding is also greater with these two P2Y12 agents compared with clopidogrel.[84] [85] All patients
should be given dual antiplatelet therapy with a P2Y12 inhibitor in addition to aspirin. If the patient is
intolerant of aspirin or it is otherwise contraindicated, a P2Y12 inhibitor can be given instead of aspirin,
but two different P2Y12 inhibitors should not be given together. Ticagrelor is recommended for patients on
either invasive or noninvasive strategies.[2] [5] Prasugrel is recommended only for patients on an invasive
strategy.[2] [5] Clopidogrel is recommended for patients who cannot receive ticagrelor or prasugrel.[5]
Prasugrel is potentially harmful as part of a dual antiplatelet therapy regimen for unstable angina/NSTEMI
patients with a prior history of stroke and/or transient ischemic attack for whom percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI) is planned.[2] [5] Prior stroke is a contraindication for prasugrel.[5] There are variable
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
responses to antiplatelet inhibition with clopidogrel based on loss-of-function alleles for the CYP219C
enzyme, which is required to convert clopidogrel to its active drug metabolite. The presence of at least
one loss-of-function mutation for CYP219C may be as high as 30% in some populations. In a single-
center, retrospective study of clopidogrel resistance it appeared that patients with clopidogrel resistance
who remain on clopidogrel are at a 4-fold increase for major adverse cardiovascular or cerebrovascular
events compared with those placed on a different P2Y12 inhibitor.[86]
Clinicians need to tailor therapy to strike a balance between a newer agent that may have a faster onset
of action and greater antiplatelet effect, but could potentiate bleeding (especially in those with prior TIA
or stroke). Regardless of which P2Y12 inhibitor is chosen, a loading dose should be given as soon as
possible in most patients and then a maintenance dose continued for a minimum of 12 months.[87]
Routine pretreatment with a P2Y12 inhibitor is not recommended if early invasive management is planned
and coronary anatomy is not known.[5] P2Y12 inhibitors have a fast onset of action, allowing a loading
dose administration after coronary angiography and directly before PCI. However, pretreatment with a
P2Y12 inhibitor may be considered in selected cases and according to the bleeding risk, when the patient
cannot undergo an early invasive strategy. In general, routine pretreatment with a P2Y12 inhibitor, in
addition to aspirin, is not recommended as it may be deleterious in patients who may have other causes
of chest pain (e.g., aortic dissection).[5]
For patients receiving chronic clopidogrel therapy prior to presentation, there is some evidence to suggest
decreased periprocedural MI with clopidogrel reloading at the time of PCI.[88]
Pain relief
Pain relief is indicated in the initial management of all patients. Sublingual nitroglycerin reduces
myocardial oxygen demand and enhances myocardial oxygen delivery. Nitroglycerin is contraindicated
if there is a history of recent phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor use (e.g., sildenafil); it should not be given
if systolic blood pressure (BP) is <90 mmHg or there is a concern about right ventricular infarction.
Intravenous nitroglycerin is recommended in patients with no symptom relief after 3 sublingual
nitroglycerin tablets or sprays taken 5 minutes apart. If the patient does not respond after taking 3
sublingual nitroglycerin tablets or has recurrent symptoms despite sufficient anti-ischemic treatment,
intravenous morphine can be administered in the absence of any contraindications.[2] Morphine causes
vasodilation and may produce reductions in heart rate (through increased vagal tone) and systolic BP to
further reduce myocardial oxygen demand. It should be given instead of nitroglycerin when nitroglycerin
is contraindicated. Limited data (largely observational studies) investigate morphine use for NSTEMI
with evidence of potential safety concerns, thus it should be used with caution.[89] One randomized,
double-blind trial found that morphine delays and attenuates ticagrelor exposure and action in patients
with MI.[90]
Beta-blockers
Oral beta-blockers are recommended for routine use in all patients unless contraindicated.
Contraindications include heart rate <60 bpm, systolic BP <100 mmHg, moderate or severe associated
left ventricular failure, PR interval on the ECG >0.24 seconds, second- or third-degree heart block, active
asthma/reactive airways disease, severe COPD, right ventricular infarction, and cardiogenic shock.
Randomized trials with threatened or evolving MI have shown lower rates of progression to MI with beta-
blocker treatment.[91] [92] Comparative studies between the various beta-blockers in the acute setting are
lacking. However, beta-blockers without intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (e.g., metoprolol, propranolol,
and atenolol) are preferred. Cardioselective beta-blockers are preferred in the initial management of
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
NSTEMI, but guidelines recommend metoprolol, bisoprolol, or carvedilol for post-NSTEMI management in
patients with stabilized heart failure and reduced systolic function.[2]
The selection of a long-term beta-blocker often depends on the clinician's familiarity with the agent. The
goal resting heart rate is 50 to 60 bpm. Intravenous administration of beta-blockers has shown harm,
especially for patients with evidence of heart failure or shock, and is generally avoided.[2] [93]
Calcium-channel blockers
Calcium-channel blockers can be given in patients with continuing or recurrent ischemic symptoms after
being given adequate nitrate and beta-blocker therapy or in those who cannot tolerate beta-blockers.[2]
Although they are often used, there is good-quality evidence that calcium-channel blockers are no
more effective than control at reducing mortality or MI rates in people with unstable angina. Patients
treated acutely with a calcium-channel blocker for acute angina do not need to continue these drugs,
provided there is no recurrent angina on drug cessation or another indication for these drugs (i.e.,
hypertension). These drugs can start to be tapered after 24 hours at the discretion of the clinician. Short-
acting dihydropyridines (e.g., nifedipine) should be avoided in the absence of adequate beta-blocker
therapy because they may be associated with adverse outcomes.[2] Verapamil or diltiazem should be
avoided in severe left ventricular dysfunction.[2]
Choice of invasive or conservative management
Once initial management is instigated, the decision should be made as to whether the patient requires
treatment using an invasive or noninvasive approach. The decision to pursue an invasive approach
or medical management is made on an individual basis.[94] Guidelines recommend that high-risk
patients routinely undergo early (12-24 hours) coronary angiography and angiographically directed
revascularization if possible unless patients have serious comorbidities, including cancer or end-stage
liver disease, or clinically obvious contraindications, including acute or chronic (chronic kidney disease
[CKD] 4 or higher) renal failure, multi-organ failure, or medical frailty.[2] [59] [95]
General recommendations for invasive coronary angiogram and revascularization in non-ST-elevation
acute coronary syndromes include:[5] [64]
• An immediate invasive strategy (<2 hours) in patients with at least one of the following very high-
risk criteria:
• Hemodynamic instability or cardiogenic shock
• Recurrent or ongoing chest pain refractory to medical treatment
• Life-threatening arrhythmias
• Mechanical complications of MI
• Acute heart failure related to non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome
• ST-segment depression >1mm in >6 leads, plus ST-segment elevation in lead aVR and/or V1
• An early invasive strategy (<24 hours) in patients with at least one of the following high-risk criteria:
• NSTEMI
• Dynamic ST- or T-wave changes (symptomatic or silent)
• Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) score >140
• Resuscitated cardiac arrest, without ST-segment elevation or cardiogenic shock.
Patients with no recurrence of symptoms and none of the high or very high-risk features are considered at
low risk for acute ischemic events and can be managed by a selective invasive strategy.[5] [96] Patients
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
who are on optimal medical therapy and are still having symptoms and/or those with large areas of
ischemia (>10% of left ventricular myocardium) should be considered for revascularization.[97] A
noninvasive test for ischemia (preferably with imaging) is recommended in patients with none of the
above-mentioned risk criteria and no recurrent symptoms, before deciding on an invasive evaluation.[5]
Following a selective invasive strategy, a coronary angiogram is usually carried out for recurring
symptoms, objective evidence of ischemia on noninvasive testing, or detection of obstructive coronary
artery disease on coronary computed tomography angiography.
A conservative, early medical management strategy may be appropriate in subsets of patients, especially
those without the above high-risk features and with a low risk score. Guidelines and data suggest
that some subpopulations do not benefit from early invasive management, and clinician discretion is
advocated.[59] [95] For example, a routine early invasive strategy in low-risk women with NSTEMI has
not shown benefit over a conservative strategy.[98] While traditionally not included in many clinical trials,
emerging data suggest that older patients may benefit as much, if not more, from an invasive strategy.[99]
[100] [101] However, presence of comorbid conditions, variable pre-existing functional status, and patient
preferences regarding goals of care make disease management more complex in older patients. An
individualized and patient-centered approach is recommended.[31]
Invasive approach
Anticoagulation therapy (subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin [LMWH], intravenous unfractionated
heparin [UFH], or the alternative agent bivalirudin) should be started on earliest recognition of
NSTEMI. Fondaparinux alone is no longer recommended due to a higher incidence of guiding-catheter
thrombosis.[64] Bivalirudin is a reasonable alternative to unfractionated heparin for patients undergoing
PCI.[64] The anticoagulant is used in conjunction with antiplatelet therapy already started (i.e., aspirin and
a P2Y12 inhibitor).[2] [5] Anticoagulation should not be given if there are contraindications: namely, major
bleeding, or history of adverse drug reaction or heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
The antiplatelet and anticoagulation regimens should be started before the diagnostic angiogram (i.e.,
upstream). Addition of a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor is recommended if there is a large thrombus burden,
evidence of a no-reflow, or slow flow.[64]
The PCI involves angioplasty, alone or in combination with placement of a stent, capable of relieving
coronary narrowing or occlusion.[64] Radial artery access is preferred when possible as it decreases
procedural site complications.[64] [102] Complications of PCI include PCI-induced MI; coronary
perforation, dissection, or rupture; cardiac tamponade; malignant arrhythmias; cholesterol emboli; and
bleeding from the access site. Contrast-induced nephropathy is a common and potentially serious
complication, especially in patients with baseline impaired renal function.[103] Early and late stent
thromboses are catastrophic complications.
Conservative approach
Anticoagulation treatment should be added to aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibitor at the earliest recognition (or
suspicion) of NSTEMI and continued for at least 48 hours to hospital discharge and/or until symptoms
abide and objective markers demonstrate a trend toward normal.[104] Agents include subcutaneous
LMWH, intravenous UFH, or fondaparinux, according to clinician choice.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Long-term management post-stabilization
Long-term therapy consists of a range of pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic strategies. Cardiac
rehabilitation is a structured program that provides heart attack survivors with the tools, motivation, and
support needed to change behavior and increase the chance of survival. Typically, cardiac rehabilitation
programs use group therapy to supervise and promote beneficial exercise, as well as to provide emotional
support. Home-based cardiac rehabilitation may also be an option.[105] The aims of cardiac rehabilitation
are to:
• Increase functional capacity
• Stop cigarette smoking
• Modify lipids and lipoproteins
• Decrease body weight and fat stores
• Reduce BP
• Improve psychosocial well-being
• Prevent progression and promote plaque stability
• Restore and maintain optimal physical, psychological, emotional, social, and vocational functioning.
Cardiac rehabilitation should be started on discharge and after clearance by an outpatient physician.
The basic prescription should include aerobic and weight-bearing exercise 4 to 5 times per week for >30
minutes. There is a risk of triggering a recurrent MI with physical activity. However, this is minimal and
reduced by using a structured program to minimize (and treat) this risk.
Pharmacologic strategies include the following.
• Aspirin should be continued indefinitely at a low dose if the patient is tolerant and not
contraindicated.
• A P2Y12 inhibitor should be continued for up to 12 months. For patients with aspirin allergy, long-
term P2Y12 inhibitor use is suggested.[2] [5] [106] [107]
• In selected patients undergoing PCI, shorter-duration dual antiplatelet therapy (1-3 months) can
be considered, with subsequent transition to P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy to reduce the risk of
bleeding events.[64]
• Indefinite use of oral beta-blockers has been shown to benefit patients with acute infarction
and/or reduced left ventricular function. Cardioselective beta-blockers are preferred in the initial
management of NSTEMI, but guidelines recommend metoprolol, bisoprolol, or carvedilol for post-
NSTEMI management in patients with stabilized heart failure and reduced systolic function.[2] [64]
The decision to continue beta-blockers long term after revascularization should be made on an
individualized basis.[64]
• All patients with NSTEMI should start high-intensity statin therapy (moderate-intensity if not a
candidate for high-intensity statin) in hospital regardless of cholesterol levels, and if there are
no contraindications.[5] [28] Two trials demonstrated superior outcomes in patients treated with
atorvastatin within 12 hours of receiving PCI, and it may provide benefit when given early in
NSTEMI.[108] [109] A high-intensity statin is defined as a daily dose that lowers low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) by approximately >50%, while a moderate-intensity statin daily dose
lowers LDL-C by approximately 30% to 50%. Statins inhibit the rate-limiting step in cholesterol
synthesis. They may also reduce vascular inflammation, improve endothelial function, and
decrease thrombus formation in addition to lowering LDL.[29] [28] For secondary prevention,
treatment of patients who have atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) depends on
their risk of future ASCVD events.[28] Patients are considered to be at very high risk of future
events if they have a history of multiple major ASCVD events (recent acute coronary syndrome
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
[within the past 12 months], MI other than the recent acute coronary syndrome, ischemic stroke,
symptomatic peripheral arterial disease [claudication with ankle brachial index <0.85, previous
revascularization or amputation]) or one major ASCVD event and multiple high-risk conditions (age
≥65 years, heterozygous family history, history of previous coronary artery bypass graft or PCI,
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, CKD, current smoking, persistently elevated LDL-C [≥100 mg/dL]
despite maximally tolerated therapy, history of congestive heart failure). Patients at very high risk
of future events should receive high-intensity statin therapy or maximal statin therapy. In patients
not at very high risk of future events, high-intensity statin therapy should be initiated and continued
in those ages up to 75 years with the aim of achieving a 50% or greater reduction in LDL-C levels.
Moderate-intensity statin therapy may be used (reducing LDL-C by 30% to <50%) if high-intensity
statin therapy is not tolerated. In patients older than 75 years, moderate- or high-intensity statin
therapy should be considered.[28] For patients at very high risk of future events, and those ages
up to 75 years and not at very high risk, ezetimibe may be added if the patient is on maximal statin
therapy and LDL-C level remains ≥70 mg/dL.[5] [28] [110] [111]
• The addition of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK-9) inhibitors, alirocumab and
evolocumab, to maximally tolerated statin and ezetimibe therapy may also be considered for
patients at very high risk of future events if LDL-C level remains ≥70 mg/dL or non-HDL-C ≥100
mg/dL.[5] [28] [112] [113] Alirocumab is approved for use as adjunct therapy to diet and maximally
tolerated statin therapy for adult patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, or clinical
ASCVD, who require additional lowering of LDL and also to reduce the risk of heart attack, stroke,
and unstable angina requiring hospitalization in adults with established cardiovascular disease.
Evolocumab is approved as an adjunct to diet and other lipid-lowering therapies (e.g., statins,
ezetimibe) in patients with primary hyperlipidemia (including heterozygous hypercholesterolemia)
and homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia to reduce LDL. It is now also approved to reduce
the risk of MI in patients with established cardiovascular disease, and may be used for this
indication without adjunctive diet and lipid-lowering therapies. Evolocumab and alirocumab may
also be used as an alternative to statins if they are contraindicated or the patient is intolerant of
statins.
• ACE inhibitors should be started in all patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction (ejection
fraction <40%), heart failure, hypertension, diabetes, stable chronic kidney disease, or other
high-risk features, such as ongoing ischemia with worsening heart failure, third heart sound (S3)
gallop, new or worsening mitral regurgitation, or hemodynamic instability, without overt cardiogenic
shock.[2] [5] [114] [115] [116] They are started after 24 hours. The goal blood pressure is at least
<140/90 mmHg (including patients with chronic kidney disease or diabetes).[117] Angiotensin-II
receptor antagonists may be used if the patient is intolerant to an ACE inhibitor.[118] [119] [120]
• Aldosterone antagonists (e.g., eplerenone, spironolactone) should be used in all patients with
left ventricular dysfunction (ejection fraction ≤40%), a history of diabetes mellitus, or evidence of
congestive heart failure (S3 gallop, rales). They should be started in patients receiving target doses
of ACE inhibitors or angiotensin-II receptor antagonists. Aldosterone blockade should not be used
in patients with serum creatinine >2.5 mg/dL in men or >2.0 mg/dL in women, as well as in patients
with hyperkalemia (potassium >5.0 mEq/L).[121]
• Oral anticoagulation may be indicated at discharge in selected patients with NSTEMI who
are considered to be high risk for recurrent thrombosis. While direct thrombin and factor Xa
inhibitors may produce a modest reduction in ischemic events when added to antiplatelet therapy,
results also suggest that they increase the risk of major bleeding, particularly when added to
dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel.[122] Low-dose rivaroxaban has been
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
demonstrated to reduce future cardiovascular events but causes an almost equivalent increase in
major bleeding events.[123] [124] 
• Triple antithrombotic therapy should be kept to as short a duration as clinically feasible for the
patient, with full-dose oral anticoagulant indication after stent placement/acute coronary syndrome
event.[125] [126]
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute ( summary )
acute presentation
1st antiplatelet therapy
adjunct oxygen
plus nitroglycerin ± morphine
plus beta-blocker
adjunct calcium-channel blocker
plus assess need for invasive or conservative
approach
invasive approach
planned
plus percutaneous coronary intervention
plus anticoagulation
adjunct glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor
invasive approach not
planned
plus anticoagulation
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
Ongoing ( summary )
post-stabilization
1st cardiac rehabilitation
plus continue antiplatelet therapy
plus continue beta-blocker
plus statin
adjunct ezetimibe added to statin therapy
adjunct proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type
9 (PCSK-9) inhibitor
adjunct ACE inhibitor or angiotensin-II receptor
antagonist
adjunct aldosterone antagonist
adjunct anticoagulation
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute
acute presentation
1st antiplatelet therapy
Primary options
conservative strategy
» aspirin: 162-325 mg orally as a loading
dose, followed by 81-162 mg once daily
-and-
» ticagrelor: 180 mg orally as a loading dose,
followed by 90 mg twice daily
OR
PCI planned
» aspirin: 162-325 mg orally as a loading
dose, followed by 81-162 mg once daily
--AND--
» prasugrel: 60 mg orally as a loading dose,
followed by 10 mg once daily
-or-
» ticagrelor: 180 mg orally as a loading dose,
followed by 90 mg twice daily
Secondary options
conservative strategy
» aspirin: 162-325 mg orally as a loading
dose, followed by 81-162 mg once daily
-and-
» clopidogrel: 300 mg orally as a loading
dose, followed by 75 mg once daily
OR
PCI planned
» aspirin: 162-325 mg orally as a loading
dose, followed by 81-162 mg once daily
-and-
» clopidogrel: 600 mg orally as a loading
dose (or 300 mg prior to PCI and 300 mg at
time of PCI), followed by 75 mg once daily
OR
aspirin-allergic patients
» ticagrelor: conservative strategy or PCI
planned: 180 mg orally as a loading dose,
followed by 90 mg twice daily
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
Acute
-or-
» clopidogrel: conservative strategy: 300 mg
orally as loading dose, followed by 75 mg
once daily; PCI planned: 600 mg orally as a
loading dose (or 300 mg prior to PCI and 300
mg at time of PCI), followed by 75 mg once
daily
-or-
» prasugrel: PCI planned: 60 mg orally as a
loading dose, followed by 10 mg once daily
» All patients should be given dual antiplatelet
therapy with aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibitor. If the
patient is intolerant of aspirin or it is otherwise
contraindicated, a P2Y12 inhibitor can be
given alone, but two different P2Y12 inhibitors
should not be given together. Ticagrelor is
recommended for patients on either invasive
or noninvasive strategies.[2] [5] Prasugrel is
recommended only for patients on an invasive
strategy.[2] [5] Clopidogrel is recommended
for patients who cannot receive ticagrelor or
prasugrel.[5]
» Aspirin should be given on clinical suspicion
or diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome and
continued indefinitely. Healthcare personnel
providing prehospital emergency services
should give a single loading dose of aspirin to
chest pain patients suspected of having acute
coronary syndrome unless contraindicated or
already taken by the patient.[2]
» High-dose aspirin is associated with an
increased risk of bleeding when compared with
low-dose aspirin and in the absence of improved
outcomes.[2]
» A loading dose of a P2Y12 inhibitor is given
as soon as possible on admission and then
a maintenance dose is given for up to 12
months.[127] One trial showed that adding
clopidogrel to aspirin therapy in acute myocardial
infarction (MI) prevents 10 major vascular events
per 1000 treated.[128] P2Y12 inhibitors can
reduce mortality and morbidity, but they may
be associated with increased bleeding risk.[80]
[81] Ticagrelor and prasugrel are newer P2Y12
agents, which trials have shown to have a faster
onset of action and greater efficacy compared
with clopidogrel, but with an increased risk of
bleeding.[2] [82] [83]
» Routine pretreatment with a P2Y12 inhibitor is
not recommended if early invasive management
is planned and coronary anatomy is not
known.[5]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
» Prior stroke is a contraindication for
prasugrel.[5] For patients receiving chronic
clopidogrel therapy prior to presentation,
there is some evidence to suggest decreased
periprocedural MI with clopidogrel reloading
at the time of percutaneous coronary
intervention.[88]
» Prasugrel is potentially harmful as part of a
dual antiplatelet therapy regimen for unstable
angina/NSTEMI patients with a prior history of
stroke and/or transient ischemic attack for whom
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is
planned.[2] [5] Prior stroke is a contraindication
for prasugrel.[5] There are variable responses
to antiplatelet inhibition with clopidogrel based
on loss-of-function alleles for the CYP219C
enzyme, which is required to convert clopidogrel
to its active drug metabolite. The presence
of at least one loss-of-function mutation for
CYP219C may be as high as 30% in some
populations. In a single-center retrospective
study of clopidogrel resistance, it appeared that
patients with clopidogrel resistance who remain
on clopidogrel are at a fourfold increase for
major adverse cardiovascular or cerebrovascular
events compared with those placed on a
different P2Y12 inhibitor.[86]
» Conflicting data regarding interactions between
proton-pump inhibitors and clopidogrel have
resulted in broad warnings by regulatory
agencies. There are weak data documenting
decreased platelet assay responsiveness and
worse outcomes in retrospective clinical studies
of patients using clopidogrel and proton-pump
inhibitors together. The results of the only
large randomized trial appear to refute earlier
observational data and found no increase in risk
with coadministration of these agents. Proton-
pump inhibitors are recommended for patients
with a history of NSTEMI who also require triple
therapy, particularly when there is a history of
gastrointestinal bleeding. Clinical discretion is
advised, as guidelines do not fully address this
controversy.[129]
adjunct oxygen
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» All patients require oxygen
saturation measurement using pulse
oximetry.[2] Supplemental oxygen should be
administered only to patients with an arterial
oxygen saturation <90%, respiratory distress, or
other high-risk features for hypoxemia.[2] [5]
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
Acute
» Liberal use of oxygen is associated with
increased mortality in patients with acute
coronary syndrome.[75]
plus nitroglycerin ± morphine
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» nitroglycerin: 400-800 micrograms (1-2
sprays) every 5 minutes, maximum 3 doses
OR
» nitroglycerin: 0.3 to 0.6 mg sublingually
every 5 minutes, maximum 3 doses
Secondary options
» nitroglycerin: 5 micrograms/min
intravenously initially, increase by 5-20
micrograms/min increments every 3-5
minutes, maximum 200 micrograms/min
Tertiary options
» morphine sulfate: 2-5 mg intravenously
every 5-30 minutes when required
-and-
» nitroglycerin: 5 micrograms/min
intravenously initially, increase by 5-20
micrograms/min increments every 3-5
minutes, maximum 200 micrograms/min
OR
» morphine sulfate: 2-5 mg intravenously
every 5-30 minutes when required
» Nitroglycerin is contraindicated if there is a
history of recent phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor
use (e.g., sildenafil); it should not be given if
systolic BP is <90 mmHg or there is a concern
about right ventricular infarct.
» Intravenous nitroglycerin is indicated if 3 doses
of sublingual nitroglycerin have not relieved the
pain.
» Morphine should be added early if nitroglycerin
is not sufficient. Morphine, in addition to
its analgesic and anxiolytic properties, has
hemodynamic effects that are potentially
beneficial in unstable angina and NSTEMI.
» Morphine causes vasodilation and may
produce reductions in heart rate (through
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
increased vagal tone) and systolic BP to
further reduce myocardial oxygen demand.[2] If
nitroglycerin is not effective or is contraindicated,
morphine can be given as an alternative in
the absence of any contraindications. Limited
data (largely observational studies) investigate
morphine use for NSTEMI with evidence of
potential safety concerns, thus it should be
used with caution.[89] One small, randomized,
double-blind trial found that morphine delays
and attenuates ticagrelor exposure and action in
patients with myocardial infarction.[90]
plus beta-blocker
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» metoprolol tartrate: 50-100 mg orally
(regular-release) twice daily
OR
» atenolol: 50-100 mg/day orally
OR
» propranolol hydrochloride: 180-320 mg/
day orally (immediate-release) given in 3-4
divided doses
» Oral beta-blockers should be given to all
patients unless contraindicated.
» Treatment should begin within a few days of
the event, if not initiated acutely, and should be
continued indefinitely, especially in patients with
reduced left ventricular function.
» Contraindications to beta-blocker therapy
include heart rate <60 bpm, systolic BP <100
mmHg, moderate or severe left ventricular
failure, PR interval on the ECG >0.24 seconds,
second- or third-degree heart block, active
asthma/reactive airways disease, severe COPD,
right ventricular infarction, and cardiogenic
shock.[2] [91] [92]
» Randomized trials with threatened or evolving
myocardial infarction (MI) have shown lower
rates of progression to MI with beta-blocker
treatment.[91] [92] Comparative studies between
the various beta-blockers in the acute setting are
lacking. However, beta-blockers without intrinsic
sympathomimetic activity (e.g., metoprolol,
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
Acute
propranolol, and atenolol) are preferred for initial
management.
» Selection of a long-term beta-blocker often
depends on the clinician's familiarity with the
agent. The goal resting heart rate is 50 to 60
bpm.[2]
adjunct calcium-channel blocker
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» diltiazem: 30-90 mg orally (immediate-
release) four times daily
OR
» verapamil: 80-120 mg orally (immediate-
release) three times daily
OR
» amlodipine: 5-10 mg orally once daily
» Calcium-channel blockers can be given to
patients with continuing or recurrent ischemic
symptoms after being given adequate nitrate
and beta-blocker therapy, or those who cannot
tolerate beta-blockers.[2] Although they are often
used, they are no more effective than control at
reducing mortality or myocardial infarction rates
in people with unstable angina.
» Patients treated acutely with a calcium-channel
blocker for acute angina do not need to continue
these drugs, provided there is no recurrent
angina on drug cessation or another indication
for these drugs (i.e., hypertension). These drugs
can be tapered after 24 hours at the discretion of
the clinician.
» Short-acting dihydropyridines (e.g., nifedipine)
should be avoided in the absence of adequate
beta-blocker therapy because they may be
associated with adverse outcomes.[2]
» Verapamil or diltiazem should be avoided in
severe left ventricular dysfunction.[2]
plus assess need for invasive or conservative
approach
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» General recommendations for invasive
coronary angiogram and revascularization in
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes
include:[5] [64]
» 1) An immediate invasive strategy (<2 hours)
in patients with at least one of the following
very high-risk criteria: hemodynamic instability
or cardiogenic shock; recurrent or ongoing
chest pain refractory to medical treatment;
life-threatening arrhythmias; mechanical
complications of myocardial infarction; acute
heart failure related to non-ST-elevation acute
coronary syndrome; ST-segment depression
>1mm in >6 leads, plus ST-segment elevation in
lead aVR and/or V1.
» 2) An early invasive strategy (<24 hours) in
patients with at least one of the following high-
risk criteria: NSTEMI; dynamic ST- or T-wave
changes (symptomatic or silent); Global Registry
of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE) score >140;
resuscitated cardiac arrest, without ST-segment
elevation or cardiogenic shock.
» Patients with no recurrence of symptoms
and none of the high or very high-risk features
are considered at low risk for acute ischemic
events and can be managed by a selective
invasive strategy.[5] [96] Patients who are on
optimal medical therapy and are still having
symptoms and/or those with large areas of
ischemia (>10% of left ventricular myocardium)
should be considered for revascularization.[97]
A noninvasive test for ischemia (preferably
with imaging) is recommended in patients with
none of the above-mentioned risk criteria and
no recurrent symptoms, before deciding on an
invasive evaluation.[5]
» Following a selective invasive strategy, a
coronary angiogram is usually carried out for
recurring symptoms, objective evidence of
ischemia on noninvasive testing, or detection of
obstructive coronary artery disease on coronary
computed tomography angiography.
invasive approach
planned
plus percutaneous coronary intervention
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Angioplasty is coupled with placement of
stents.[64]
» Complications of percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI) include PCI-induced
myocardial infarction; coronary perforation,
dissection, or rupture; cardiac tamponade;
malignant arrhythmias; cholesterol emboli; and
bleeding from the access site. At experienced
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
Acute
high-volume sites, radial artery access is
preferred due to decreased access site
complications.[102]
» Contrast-induced nephropathy is a common
and potentially serious complication, especially
in patients with baseline impaired renal
function.[103] Stent thromboses (early and late)
are a catastrophic complication.
plus anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» heparin: 60 units/kg intravenous bolus
initially, followed by 12 units/kg/hour infusion,
adjust dose to target aPTT of 50-75 seconds
OR
» enoxaparin: 30 mg intravenous bolus
initially, followed by 1 mg/kg subcutaneously
every 12 hours
OR
» dalteparin: 120 units/kg subcutaneously
every 12 hours, maximum 10,000 units twice
daily
OR
» bivalirudin: 0.1 mg/kg intravenous bolus,
followed by 0.25 mg/kg/hour intravenous
infusion until diagnostic angiography or PCI is
performed
» Anticoagulation therapy can be subcutaneous
low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) (e.g.,
enoxaparin), intravenous unfractionated heparin
(UFH), or bivalirudin, irrespective of the initial
treatment strategy, and therapy can be continued
throughout hospitalization or until the time of
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).[130]
Fondaparinux alone is no longer recommended
due to a higher incidence of guiding-catheter
thrombosis.[64] Bivalirudin is a reasonable
alternative to unfractionated heparin for patients
undergoing PCI.[64]
» UFH and LMWH are thrombin inhibitors. Like
heparin, their mechanism of action involves
binding to antithrombin III to increase its
anticoagulant activity.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
» UFH and LMWH are contraindicated in
patients with major bleeding, history of
adverse drug reaction, or heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia.
» Creatinine clearance should be assessed
before administering enoxaparin. Patients with
severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance
<30 mL/minute) should be considered for UFH
over enoxaparin, or a dose reduction may be
required in these patients.
adjunct glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» eptifibatide: 180 micrograms/kg intravenous
bolus initially at time of percutaneous
coronary intervention, followed by 2
micrograms/kg/min infusion for up to 18-24
hours and a second bolus of 180 micrograms/
kg/dose 10 minutes after the initial bolus
OR
» tirofiban: 0.4 micrograms/kg/min
intravenous infusion for 30 minutes, followed
by 0.1 micrograms/kg/min
» Glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa inhibitors block
platelet binding of fibrinogen to the GP IIb/IIIa
receptor. This is the final stage before platelet
aggregation and the formation of thrombus.
» Tirofiban or eptifibatide are preferred if GP
IIb/IIIa inhibitor administration is planned.[115]
[131] However, addition of a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor
is recommended if there is a large thrombus
burden, evidence of a no-reflow, or slow flow.[64]
invasive approach not
planned
plus anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» heparin: 60 units/kg intravenous bolus
initially, followed by 12-15 units/kg/hour
infusion, adjust dose to target aPTT of 50-75
seconds
OR
» enoxaparin: 30 mg intravenous bolus
initially, followed by 1 mg/kg subcutaneously
every 12 hours
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
Acute
OR
» dalteparin: 120 units/kg subcutaneously
every 12 hours, maximum 10,000 units twice
daily
OR
» fondaparinux: 2.5 mg subcutaneously once
daily for up to 8 days
» Anticoagulation therapy can be subcutaneous
low molecular weight heparin (e.g., enoxaparin),
or intravenous unfractionated heparin (UFH), or
fondaparinux.
» Anticoagulation is contraindicated in patients
with major bleeding, history of adverse drug
reaction, or heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
» Creatinine clearance should be assessed
before administering enoxaparin or
fondaparinux. Patients with severe renal
impairment (creatinine clearance <30 mL/
minute) should be considered for UFH over
enoxaparin, or a dose reduction may be
required in these patients. Fondaparinux is
contraindicated in patients with severe renal
impairment.[2]
» If the treatment program changes and
percutaneous coronary intervention is
performed while the patient is on fondaparinux,
an additional anticoagulant with anti-IIa
activity (either UFH or bivalirudin) should be
administered because of the risk of catheter
thrombosis.[2]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
post-stabilization
1st cardiac rehabilitation
» The aims of cardiac rehabilitation are to
increase functional capacity; stop cigarette
smoking; modify lipids and lipoproteins;
decrease body weight and fat stores; reduce
blood pressure; improve psychosocial wellbeing;
prevent progression and promote plaque
stability; induce regression of underlying
atherosclerosis; and restore and maintain
optimal physical, psychological, emotional,
social, and vocational functioning.[132]
» Cardiac rehabilitation should be started on
discharge and after clearance by an outpatient
physician. The basic prescription should include
aerobic and weight-bearing exercise 4 to 5
times per week for >30 minutes. There is a risk
of triggering a recurrent myocardial infarction
with physical activity. However, this is minimal
and reduced by using a structured program to
minimize (and treat) this risk.[132]
plus continue antiplatelet therapy
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
aspirin-tolerant
» aspirin: 81 mg orally once daily
--AND--
» clopidogrel: 75 mg orally once daily
-or-
» ticagrelor: 90 mg orally twice daily
-or-
» prasugrel: 10 mg orally once daily
OR
aspirin-intolerant
» clopidogrel: 75 mg orally once daily
-or-
» ticagrelor: 90 mg orally twice daily
-or-
» prasugrel: 10 mg orally once daily
» In patients tolerant to aspirin, it should
normally be continued indefinitely at a low
dose. In addition, a P2Y12 inhibitor should be
continued for up to 12 months in patients treated
medically (no stenting) or treated with a bare
metal stent, and for at least 12 months for those
patients treated with a drug-eluting stent.[87]
In selected patients undergoing PCI, shorter-
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
Ongoing
duration dual antiplatelet therapy (1-3 months) is
reasonable, with subsequent transition to P2Y12
inhibitor monotherapy to reduce the risk of
bleeding events.[64] Ticagrelor is recommended
for patients on either invasive or noninvasive
strategies.[2] [5] Prasugrel is recommended
only for patients on an invasive strategy.[2] [5]
Clopidogrel is recommended for patients who
cannot receive ticagrelor or prasugrel.[5]
» In patients intolerant of aspirin, or if it is
otherwise contraindicated, a P2Y12 inhibitor
can be given alone, in which case it too should
be continued indefinitely. Two different P2Y12
inhibitors should not be given together.
» Prasugrel is potentially harmful as part of a
dual antiplatelet therapy regimen for unstable
angina/NSTEMI patients with a prior history
of stroke and/or transient ischemic attack for
whom percutaneous coronary intervention is
planned.[2] [5] Prior stroke is a contraindication
for prasugrel.[5] There are variable responses
to antiplatelet inhibition with clopidogrel based
on loss-of-function alleles for the CYP219C
enzyme, which is required to convert clopidogrel
to its active drug metabolite. The presence
of at least one loss-of-function mutation for
CYP219C may be as high as 30% in some
populations. In a single-center retrospective
study of clopidogrel resistance, it appeared that
patients with clopidogrel resistance who remain
on clopidogrel are at a fourfold increase for
major adverse cardiovascular or cerebrovascular
events compared with those placed on a
different P2Y12 inhibitor.[86]
plus continue beta-blocker
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» metoprolol succinate: 25-200 mg orally
(extended-release) once daily
OR
» bisoprolol: 1.25 to 10 mg orally once daily
OR
» carvedilol: 12.5 mg orally twice daily for 2
days, followed by 25 mg twice daily
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
» Indefinite use of oral beta-blockers has been
shown to benefit patients with acute infarction
and/or reduced left ventricular function.
» Cardioselective beta-blockers are preferred
in the initial management of NSTEMI, but
guidelines recommend metoprolol, bisoprolol,
or carvedilol for post-NSTEMI management in
patients with stabilized heart failure and reduced
systolic function.[2] [64] The decision to continue
beta-blockers long term after revascularization
should be made on an individualized basis.[64]
plus statin
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
high-intensity statin
» atorvastatin: 40-80 mg orally once daily
OR
high-intensity statin
» rosuvastatin: 20-40 mg orally once daily
Secondary options
moderate-intensity statin
» atorvastatin: 10-20 mg orally once daily
OR
moderate-intensity statin
» rosuvastatin: 5-10 mg orally once daily
OR
moderate-intensity statin
» lovastatin: 40 mg orally once daily
OR
moderate-intensity statin
» fluvastatin: 40 mg orally (immediate-
release) twice daily; 80 mg orally (extended-
release) once daily
OR
moderate-intensity statin
» simvastatin: 20-40 mg orally once daily
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
Ongoing
Doses higher than 40 mg/day are not
recommended due to the increased risk of
myopathy.
OR
moderate-intensity statin
» pravastatin: 40-80 mg orally once daily
OR
moderate-intensity statin
» pitavastatin: 2-4 mg orally once daily
» All patients with NSTEMI should receive a
high-intensity statin (moderate intensity if not
candidate for high-intensity statin) in hospital
regardless of cholesterol levels, and if there are
no contraindications.[5] [28] A high-intensity
statin is defined as a daily dose that lowers
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) by
approximately >50%, while a moderate-intensity
statin daily dose lowers LDL-C by approximately
30% to 50%.
» Statins inhibit the rate-limiting step in
cholesterol synthesis. They may also reduce
vascular inflammation, improve endothelial
function, and decrease thrombus formation in
addition to lowering LDL.[29]
» For secondary prevention, treatment of
patients who have atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease (ASCVD) depends on their risk of future
ASCVD events.[28] Patients are considered
to be at very high risk of future events if they
have a history of multiple major ASCVD events
(recent acute coronary syndrome [within the
past 12 months], myocardial infarction other than
the recent acute coronary syndrome, ischemic
stroke, symptomatic peripheral arterial disease
[claudication with ankle brachial index <0.85,
previous revascularization or amputation]) or
one major ASCVD event and multiple high-
risk conditions (age ≥65 years, heterozygous
family history, history of previous coronary
artery bypass graft or percutaneous coronary
intervention, diabetes mellitus, hypertension,
chronic kidney disease, current smoking,
persistently elevated LDL-C [≥100 mg/dL]
despite maximally tolerated therapy, history
of congestive heart failure). Patients at very
high risk of future events should receive high-
intensity statin therapy or maximal statin therapy.
In patients not at very high risk of future events,
high-intensity statin therapy should be initiated
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
and continued in those ages up to 75 years with
the aim of achieving a 50% or greater reduction
in LDL-C levels. Moderate-intensity statin therapy
may be used (reducing LDL-C by 30% to <50%)
if high-intensity statin therapy is not tolerated. In
patients older than 75 years, moderate- or high-
intensity statin therapy should be considered.[28]
» Patients should be monitored for jaundice,
malaise, fatigue, and lethargy.[133]
» Fractionated bilirubin should be used rather
than alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or
aspartate transaminase (AST) to detect liver
dysfunction. If evidence of liver injury is found,
the statin should be stopped. If ALT or AST
exceeds 3 times the upper limit of normal, the
levels can be repeated but there is no need to
stop the statin.[133]
adjunct ezetimibe added to statin therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» ezetimibe: 10 mg orally once daily
» For patients at very high risk of future events,
and those ages up to 75 years and not at very
high risk, ezetimibe may be added if the patient
is on maximal statin therapy and LDL-cholesterol
level remains ≥70 mg/dL.[5] [28] [110] [111]
adjunct proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type
9 (PCSK-9) inhibitor
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» alirocumab: 75-150 mg subcutaneously
once every two weeks, or 300 mg
subcutaneously once monthly
OR
» evolocumab: 140 mg subcutaneously once
every two weeks, or 420 mg subcutaneously
once monthly
» The addition of alirocumab and evolocumab to
maximally tolerated statin and ezetimibe therapy
may also be considered for patients at very
high risk of future events if LDL-cholesterol level
remains ≥70 mg/dL or non-HDL-cholesterol ≥100
mg/dL.[5] [28] [112] [113] 
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
Ongoing
» Alirocumab is approved for use as adjunct
therapy to diet and maximally tolerated statin
therapy for adult patients with heterozygous
familial hypercholesterolemia, or with clinical
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, who
require additional lowering of LDL and also
to reduce the risk of heart attack, stroke, and
unstable angina requiring hospitalization in
adults with established cardiovascular disease.
» Evolocumab is approved as an adjunct to
diet and other lipid-lowering therapies (e.g.,
statins, ezetimibe) in patients with primary
hyperlipidemia (including heterozygous
hypercholesterolemia) and homozygous
familial hypercholesterolemia to reduce LDL.
It is now also approved to reduce the risk of
myocardial infarction in patients with established
cardiovascular disease, and may be used for
this indication without adjunctive diet and lipid-
lowering therapies.
» Evolocumab and alirocumab may also be
used as an alternative to statins if they are
contraindicated or the patient is intolerant of
statins.
adjunct ACE inhibitor or angiotensin-II receptor
antagonist
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» enalapril: 2.5 mg orally once daily for 48
hours, increase gradually to 10 mg twice daily
OR
» lisinopril: 5 mg orally once daily for 48
hours, followed by 5-10 mg once daily
OR
» captopril: 6.25 mg orally three times daily
starting on day 3 post-MI, increase gradually
to 50 mg three times daily
Secondary options
» valsartan: 20 mg orally twice daily initially,
increase gradually to 160 mg twice daily
OR
» losartan: 50 mg orally once daily initially,
increase gradually to 100 mg once daily
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
OR
» candesartan cilexetil: 4 mg orally once daily
initially, increase gradually to 32 mg once
daily
» Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitors should be used in all patients with left
ventricle systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction
<40%), heart failure, hypertension, diabetes,
stable chronic kidney disease, or other high-
risk features, such as ongoing ischemia with
worsening heart failure, third heart sound
gallop, new or worsening mitral regurgitation,
or hemodynamic instability, without overt
cardiogenic shock.[2] [5] [114] [115] [116] 
» Angiotensin-II receptor antagonists may
be used in cases of intolerance to ACE
inhibitors.[118] [119] [120]
» ACE inhibitors or angiotensin-II receptor
antagonists may be started 24 hours post
myocardial infarction.
» Goal BP is at least <140/90 mmHg (including
patients with chronic kidney disease or
diabetes).[117]
adjunct aldosterone antagonist
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» eplerenone: 25 mg orally once daily initially,
increase gradually to 50 mg once daily within
4 weeks
OR
» spironolactone: 12.5 to 25 mg orally once
daily
» Aldosterone antagonists (e.g., eplerenone,
spironolactone) should be used in all patients
with left ventricular dysfunction (ejection
fraction ≤40%), a history of diabetes mellitus,
or evidence of congestive heart failure (S3
gallop, rales). They should be started in patients
receiving target doses of angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin-II
receptor antagonists. Aldosterone blockade
should not be used in patients with serum
creatinine >2.5mg/dL in men or >2.0mg/dL in
women, as well as in patients with hyperkalemia
(potassium >5.0mEq/L).[121]
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
Ongoing
adjunct anticoagulation
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» warfarin: consult specialist for guidance on
dose
OR
» rivaroxaban: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
OR
» apixaban: consult specialist for guidance on
dose
» Most patients do not need to continue
anticoagulation after hospitalization. A subset
of patients who are high risk for a repeat
thrombotic event may be put on chronic oral
anticoagulation.
» Rivaroxaban can be given to patients who
have experienced an acute coronary syndrome
at the discretion of the physician. Data from the
ATLAS ACS 2-TIMI 51 trial (Anti-Xa Therapy
to Lower Cardiovascular Events in Addition to
Aspirin with/without Thienopyridine Therapy
in Subjects with Acute Coronary Syndrome
2-Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 51)
indicated that low doses of rivaroxaban (i.e.,
5 mg/day) reduced the risk of the composite
end point of death from cardiovascular causes,
myocardial infarction, or stroke in addition to
aspirin and clopidogrel. There is an increased
risk of nonfatal bleeding that was observed in
these trials.[123] [124] 
» Patients with prior history of stroke/transient
ischemic attack, age older than 75 years, or
<60 kg body weight should not be started on
rivaroxaban for this indication.
Primary prevention
The most important preventive actions involve combined dietary and lifestyle modifications (stopping
smoking; increasing physical activity; losing weight; increasing consumption of fish, fruits, vegetables, fiber,
and nuts; reducing salt intake).[32]
Smoking is a leading preventable cause of disease, disability, and death; even low levels of smoking
increase risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD).[32] [51] Support programs, medications,
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
MANAGEMENT
and alternative therapies are available. In adults who use tobacco, a combination of behavioral interventions
plus pharmacotherapy is recommended.[32] Secondhand smoke exposure should be avoided.[32]
Routine and/or opportunistic assessment of cardiovascular risk factors with calculation of 10-year risk of
ASCVD should be used to guide decisions on treatment with preventive therapies (e.g., statins).[32] [52]
The US Preventive Services Task Force recommends that adults ages 40 to 75 years without ASCVD but
who have one or more cardiovascular risk factors (i.e., dyslipidemia, diabetes, hypertension, or smoking)
and an estimated 10-year cardiovascular disease risk of 10% or greater should be started on a statin for
primary prevention. Those with 10-year risk of between 7.5% and 10% may selectively be offered a statin.
For patients 76 years or older there is insufficient evidence to recommend for or against starting a statin for
primary prevention.[53]
Aspirin is no longer routinely recommended for primary prevention but may be considered in selected
patients for whom the absolute cardiovascular benefit outweighs the absolute risk of increased bleeding.[54]
Secondary prevention
The most important preventive actions involve combined dietary and lifestyle changes (stopping smoking;
increasing physical activity; losing weight; increasing consumption of fish, fruits, vegetables, fiber, and nuts;
reducing salt intake).
Patients should switch to a heart-healthy diet. If overweight, patients should lose weight and maintain a
healthy body weight. Patients should consume a diet rich in vegetables and fruits. Patients should be advised
to choose wholegrain, high-fiber foods and to eat fish, especially oily fish, at least twice a week. Excess
sugars, trans-fats, salt, and foods with excess cholesterol should be limited.
For a smoker, cessation is the single most crucial step that can be taken to reduce heart-related and all-
cause death. This includes avoiding second-hand smoke. Many different support programs, medications,
and alternative therapies are available to help. Data from the EVITA (Evaluation of Varenicline in Smoking
Cessation for patients post Acute Coronary Syndrome) trial suggest that pharmacotherapy with varenicline
started in hospital at the time of an acute coronary syndrome may be efficacious for smoking cessation;
however, further studies to assess safety endpoints are needed.[154] It takes as little as 3 years of smoking
cessation in a smoker who has had a myocardial infarction to reduce risk from cardiac death to the same
level as that for someone who has never smoked.
Improving physical fitness through aerobic exercise is extremely important. It is recommended that patients
engage in ≥30 minutes of moderate-intensity physical activity on most, and preferably all, days of the week.
Likewise, patients should engage in multiple short bouts of physical activity daily, such as walking the dog or
taking the stairs instead of the elevator.
Family members can be very helpful and should become involved along with other support systems to help
remind patients of, and to reinforce, lifestyle changes. Patients should use the resources that are available
(e.g., written materials, the Internet, educational classes, regular counseling) and be in close communication
with healthcare providers.
Patient discussions
Patients should schedule a follow-up appointment with their doctor in 1 to 2 weeks. Patients should be
given prescriptions and detailed discharge instructions including a list of medications to take. These
instructions should inform the patient what to do if they experience any recurrent signs or symptoms and
should include restrictions on physical activity. Before discharge, patients should also receive instruction
and prescriptions for any additional testing that is needed by the physician. These medications typically
consist of cholesterol-lowering drugs, blood pressure medications, cardioprotective drugs, aspirin, and
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Management
other similar drugs. If one is available, patients should enter a cardiac rehabilitation program. Cardiac
rehabilitation is a structured program that provides myocardial infarction (MI) survivors with the tools,
motivation, and support needed to change behavior and increase the chance of survival. Typically, cardiac
rehabilitation programs use group therapy to supervise and promote beneficial exercise, as well as to
provide emotional support. Home-based cardiac rehabilitation may also be an option.[105] 
Patients should return to the nearest emergency room or call their physician if they develop recurring
chest pain or discomfort, shortness of breath, sweating, gastrointestinal symptoms, lightheadedness,
palpitations, or other symptoms suggesting another MI or heart condition.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Monitoring
Monitoring
Close monitoring and treatment is essential. An inpatient follow-up should be arranged within the first 1
to 2 weeks of discharge. Monthly visits should be scheduled thereafter. Lipids should be monitored at
least every 6 months until a target low-density lipoprotein <70 mg/dL is reached in patients who have had
a myocardial infarction or have coronary artery disease. The need for follow-up cardiac ultrasounds is
at the discretion of the physician. However, cardiac ultrasounds are necessary to evaluate and monitor
ventricular function.[2]
It is crucial to assist smoking cessation efforts and promote a physical activity regimen. If available,
cardiac rehabilitation is extremely helpful. Psychosocial risk factors such as anxiety and depression
should be addressed. Depression in particular has been associated with a poor prognosis.[46] All
medications should be reviewed at every follow-up visit to encourage patient compliance and optimal
dosing.[2]
In patients who have undergone direct reperfusion, further noninvasive stress testing or further imaging
is indicated only if stenosis of intermediate severity (luminal narrowing of 50% to 70%) is present in a
nonculprit artery. Patients with recurrent ischemic-type pain after reperfusion may need angiography after
medical therapy to evaluate for further stenosis or occlusion.[64]
All patients, regardless of whether a stent was placed, should be treated with a P2Y12 inhibitor for up
to 12 months and low-dose aspirin daily as long as tolerated. There is some evidence that patients
treated with bare metal stents (BMS) are at an increased risk for repeat procedural care compared to
those treated with drug-eluting stents (DES). P2Y12 inhibitors for patients with acute coronary syndrome
NSTEMI should be continued for at least 12 months in all patients despite treatment strategy of medical
management, balloon angioplasty, lytic therapy, BMS placement, or DES placement. For selected patients
with stable coronary artery disease receiving percutaneous coronary intervention, shorter duration (1-3
months) of dual antiplatelet therapies may be considered with subsequent transition to P2Y12 inhibitor
monotherapy to reduce the risk of bleeding events.[64] [153] A scientific advisory from several major
health organizations describes the risks of premature discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy in
patients with coronary artery stents.[138]
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Follow up
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
cardiac arrhythmias short term medium
Arrhythmias (e.g., ventricular ectopy, atrial fibrillation, brady- or tachyarrhythmias, ventricular fibrillation
[VF], or ventricular tachycardia [VT]) occur from injury to the cardiac conduction system. They may cause
sudden death or induce cardiogenic shock.[150] Bradycardia is often seen in right-sided or posterior
infarction.
The incidence of VF is <2%. The majority of VT/VF occurs within the first 48 hours after admission.[151]
Electrolyte abnormalities should be monitored and corrected. Cardioversion or antiarrhythmic therapy
may be needed. In patients with heart block or symptomatic bradycardia, transcutaneous or transvenous
pacing may be required.
congestive heart failure (CHF) short term low
CHF in the acute setting develops in about 8% of patients. It is most often secondary to compromised
left ventricular function from a large ischemic event. Pump failure often results in pulmonary edema,
hypotension, and oliguria.
CHF requires prompt diagnosis and aggressive stabilization to prevent progression to shock. Therapy
includes diuresis, vasodilators, and staged pharmacotherapy (e.g., ACE inhibitors).
cardiogenic shock short term low
Develops in 4.5% of acute myocardial infarction (MI).[147] NSTEMI accounts for approximately 20% of
cardiogenic shock complicating MI. Typically, it occurs after a massive MI or repeated ischemic events,
and it is predominantly caused by left ventricular failure.[148] Median time to development is about 7
hours. Associated mortality is 70% to 80%, with an in-hospital mortality of 59%.[148] [149]
Cardiogenic shock requires urgent percutaneous coronary intervention or CABG surgery if not already
carried out. The patient needs intensive care and pressor support and may need intra-aortic balloon pump
counterpulsation or other circulatory assist devices as a bridge toward definitive therapy.
ventricular rupture or aneurysm short term low
Occurs in 1% to 3% of all infarcts (STEMI more than NSTEMI), usually secondary to a weakened necrotic
wall.[148] It is associated with CHF, right-sided heart failure, pulmonary edema, or cardiogenic shock.
Glucocorticoid administration has been associated with slightly higher risk of rupture.
Prompt diagnosis is the key to treatment of ventricular rupture or aneurysm. Therapy includes
management of complications (CHF or shock). Small ruptures can be managed without surgery. Larger
ruptures need surgery but the timing of surgery is controversial.
acute mitral regurgitation short term low
Most often secondary to papillary muscle rupture or acute left ventricle dilation. Acute mitral regurgitation
predominantly occurs after inferior infarction.
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
Complete papillary muscle ruptures need emergency surgical correction. Moderate to severe mitral
regurgitation in association with left ventricular dysfunction is acutely managed as CHF.
post-MI pericarditis (Dressler syndrome) short term low
Dressler syndrome is mediated by inflammatory byproducts and the formation of ischemic myocardium.
Inflammation involves the pericardium and is treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or
colchicine (preferably colchicine as it may reduce the risk of recurrence). If hemodynamic compromise is
present, pericardiocentesis or surgical intervention is required.
venous thromboembolism (VTE) short term low
MI has been associated with an increased risk of VTE, particularly for pulmonary embolism.[152]
depression variable medium
A risk factor for cardiovascular disease, but an acute cardiovascular event can also precipitate depression
in patients without prior psychiatric conditions.[46] Data suggest that a combined psychosocial approach to
the treatment of depression improves outcome in patients. Exercise combined with pharmacotherapy may
be the most efficacious approach.[45]
in-stent thrombosis variable low
Often precipitated by cessation of dual antiplatelet therapy. Occurs more frequently with drug-eluting
stents.[138]
Prognosis
Patients who have experienced NSTEMI have a high risk of morbidity and death from a future event. The
rate of sudden death in patients who have had a myocardial infarction (MI) is 4 to 6 times the rate in the
general population.[139] Life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias (sustained ventricular tachycardia or
ventricular fibrillation) occurring after 48 hours from the index acute coronary syndrome portend a poor
prognosis, and are most frequently associated with left ventricular dysfunction. The benefit of implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators, for both primary and secondary prevention, in patients with significant left
ventricular dysfunction has been well demonstrated.[140] [141] Implantation for primary prevention should be
considered at a minimum of 40 days following hospital discharge based on current recommendations.[142]
This risk varies significantly and is widely dependent on patient characteristics and risk factors (diabetes or
smoking), presence of heart failure, extent of infarction, treatment given (percutaneous coronary intervention
or coronary artery bypass graft), and compliance with long-term treatment regimens (cardiac rehabilitation,
lifestyle changes, and pharmacotherapy).[143]
Modern therapy for NSTEMI, particularly statins and revascularization, has decreased morbidity and mortality
by reducing the likelihood of cardiogenic shock, recurrent MI, and death.[144] However, these benefits
are offset by the mortality associated with trends of older age in patients who present with acute coronary
syndrome.[145]
Data from the era prior to medical therapy and revascularization suggest that the risk of cardiovascular death
following an MI in the absence of treatment is approximately 5% per year, with a death rate after hospital
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Follow up
discharge in the first year of about 10%. Pharmacotherapy, lifestyle changes, and cardiac rehabilitation are
well demonstrated to be beneficial and together are additive in reducing mortality.[146]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Guidelines
GUIDELINES
Diagnostic guidelines
International
2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation
and diagnosis of chest pain (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-
statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [57]
Published by: American Heart Association; American College of
Cardiology; American Society of Echocardiography; American College of
Chest Physicians; Society for Academic Emergency Medicine; Society
of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography; Society for Cardiovascular
Magnetic Resonance
Last published: 2021
2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with non-ST-
elevation acute coronary syndromes (https://professional.heart.org/en/
guidelines-and-statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [2]
Published by: American Heart Association; American College of
Cardiology
Last published: 2014
Depression as a risk factor for poor prognosis among patients with acute
coronary syndrome (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-
statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [46]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2014
Non-invasive imaging in coronary syndromes (https://academic.oup.com/
ehjcimaging/article/23/2/e6/6423983)   [58]
Published by: European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging;
American Society of Echocardiography
Last published: 2022
2020 ESC guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes
in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [5]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2020
Fourth universal definition of myocardial infarction (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [4]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology; American College
of Cardiology Foundation; American Heart Association; World Heart
Federation
Last published: 2018
Recent-onset chest pain of suspected cardiac origin: assessment and
diagnosis (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG95)   [55]
Published by: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2016
62 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 63 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Guidelines
Treatment guidelines
International
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery revascularization (https://
professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements/guidelines-and-
statements-search)   [64]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions
Last published: 2021
2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/
PCNA guideline on the management of blood cholesterol (https://
professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements/guidelines-and-
statements-search)   [28]
Published by: American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Last published: 2018
2017 AHA/ACC clinical performance and quality measures for adults
with ST-elevation and non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (https://
professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements/guidelines-and-
statements-search)   [47]
Published by: American Heart Association; American College of
Cardiology
Last published: 2017
ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/SCAI/SCCT/STS 2016 appropriate use criteria
for coronary revascularization in patients with acute coronary syndromes
(https://www.jacc.org/doi/full/10.1016/j.jacc.2016.10.034)   [134]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Association
for Thoracic Surgery; American Heart Association; American Society of
Echocardiography; American Society of Nuclear Cardiology; Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; Society of Cardiovascular
Computed Tomography; Society of Thoracic Surgeons
Last published: 2016
2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with non-ST-
elevation acute coronary syndromes (https://professional.heart.org/en/
guidelines-and-statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [2]
Published by: American Heart Association; American College of
Cardiology
Last published: 2014
2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS focused update of the 2008 guidelines for device-based
therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities (https://professional.heart.org/en/
guidelines-and-statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [135]
Published by: American College of Cardiology Foundation; American
Heart Association; Heart Rhythm Society
Last published: 2012
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
63
=== Page 64 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Guidelines
GUIDELINES
International
AHA/ACCF secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy for patients
with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease: 2011 update
(https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements/guidelines-and-
statements-search)   [136]
Published by: American Heart Association; American College of
Cardiology Foundation
Last published: 2011
Effectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention of cardiovascular disease
in women: 2011 update (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-
statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [137]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2011
Prevention of premature discontinuation of dual antiplatelet therapy in
patients with coronary artery stents (https://professional.heart.org/en/
guidelines-and-statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [138]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions;
American College of Surgeons; American Dental Association; American
College of Chest Physicians
Last published: 2007
Cardiac rehabilitation and secondary prevention of coronary heart disease
(https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements/guidelines-and-
statements-search)   [132]
Published by: American Heart Association; American Association of
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation
Last published: 2005
Acute coronary syndromes (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng185)   [95]
Published by: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2020
2020 ESC guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes
in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [5]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2020
Guidelines on myocardial revascularization (https://www.escardio.org/
Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [59]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology; European Association
for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery
Last published: 2018
64 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 65 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
Key articles
• Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of
patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014
Dec 23;64(24):e139-228.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/64/24/e139)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25260718?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al; Executive Group on behalf of the Joint European Society
of Cardiology (ESC)/American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA)/
World Heart Federation (WHF) Task Force for the Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction. Fourth
universal definition of myocardial infarction (2018). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Oct 30;72(18):2231-64. 
Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/early/2018/08/27/j.jacc.2018.08.1038)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30153967?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Collet JP, Thiele H, Barbato E, et al. 2020 ESC guidelines for the management of acute coronary
syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J. 2021 Apr
7;42(14):1289-367.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/14/1289/5898842)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32860058?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Writing Committee Members; Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/
SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee On Clinical Practice Guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021 Nov 30;78(22):e187-285.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0735109721057958)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34756653?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery
revascularization: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee On Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022 Jan 18;145(3):e18-114.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001038)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34882435?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. Anderson HVS, Masri SC, Abdallah MS, et al. 2022 ACC/AHA key data elements and definitions
for chest pain and acute myocardial infarction: a report of the American Heart Association/
American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Data Standards. Circ Cardiovasc
Qual Outcomes. 2022 Oct;15(10):e000112.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/
HCQ.0000000000000112)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36041014?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of
patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: a report of the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
65
=== Page 66 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
REFERENCES
Dec 23;64(24):e139-228.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/64/24/e139)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25260718?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Antman E, Bassand JP, Klein W, et al. Myocardial infarction redefined - a consensus document
of The Joint European Society of Cardiology/American College of Cardiology Committee for the
redefinition of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000 Sep;36(3):959-69.  Full text (http://
www.onlinejacc.org/content/36/3/959)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10987628?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al; Executive Group on behalf of the Joint European Society
of Cardiology (ESC)/American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA)/
World Heart Federation (WHF) Task Force for the Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction. Fourth
universal definition of myocardial infarction (2018). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Oct 30;72(18):2231-64. 
Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/early/2018/08/27/j.jacc.2018.08.1038)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30153967?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Collet JP, Thiele H, Barbato E, et al. 2020 ESC guidelines for the management of acute coronary
syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J. 2021 Apr
7;42(14):1289-367.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/14/1289/5898842)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32860058?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. World Health Organization. Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). 2021 [internet publication].  Full text
(https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/cardiovascular-diseases-(cvds))
7. Langabeer JR 2nd, Champagne-Langabeer T, Fowler R, et al. Gender-based outcome differences
for emergency department presentation ofnon-STEMI acute coronary syndrome. Am J Emerg
Med. 2019 Feb;37(2):179-82. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29754965?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Rogers WJ, Canto JG, Lambrew CT, et al. Temporal trends in the treatment of over 1.5 million
patients with myocardial infarction in the U.S. from 1990 through 1999: the National Registry of
Myocardial Infarction 1, 2 and 3. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000 Dec;36(7):2056-63.  Full text (http://
www.onlinejacc.org/content/36/7/2056)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11127441?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. McManus DD, Gore J, Yarzebski J, et al. Recent trends in the incidence, treatment, and outcomes
of patients with STEMI and NSTEMI. Am J Med. 2011 Jan;124(1):40-7.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3011975)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21187184?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Roger VL, Weston SA, Gerber Y, et al. Trends in incidence, severity, and outcome
of hospitalized myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2010 Feb 23;121(7):863-9.  Full
text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.897249?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20142444?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Rogers WJ, Frederick PD, Stoehr E, et al. Trends in presenting characteristics and hospital mortality
among patients with ST elevation and non-ST elevation myocardial infarction in the National Registry
66 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 67 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
of Myocardial Infarction from 1990 to 2006. Am Heart J. 2008 Dec;156(6):1026-34. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19032996?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. De Rosa S, Spaccarotella C, Basso C, et al. Reduction of hospitalizations for myocardial
infarction in Italy in the COVID-19 era. Eur Heart J. 2020 Jun 7;41(22):2083-88.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7239145)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/32412631?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Mesnier J, Cottin Y, Coste P, et al. Hospital admissions for acute myocardial infarction before and after
lockdown according to regional prevalence of COVID-19 and patient profile in France: a registry study.
Lancet Public Health. 2020 Oct;5(10):e536-42.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC7498416)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32950075?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Tsao CW, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics-2023 update:
a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023 Feb 21;147(8):e93-
e621.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001123?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36695182?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Jonasson L, Holm J, Skalli O, et al. Regional accumulations of T cells, macrophages, and smooth
muscle cells in the human atherosclerotic plaque. Arteriosclerosis. 1986 Mar-Apr;6(2):131-8. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2937395?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Sheridan PJ, Crossman DC. Critical review of unstable angina and non-ST elevation myocardial
infarction. Postgrad Med J. 2002 Dec;78(926):717-26. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12509688?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Wang TY, Zhang M, Fu Y, et al. Incidence, distribution, and prognostic impact of occluded culprit
arteries among patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes undergoing diagnostic
angiography. Am Heart J. 2009 Apr;157(4):716-23. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19332201?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Strong JP, Malcolm GT, McMahan CA, et al. Prevalence and extent of atherosclerosis in
adolescents and young adults: implications for prevention from the Pathobiological Determinants of
Atherosclerosis in Youth Study. JAMA. 1999 Feb 24;281(8):727-35.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jama/fullarticle/188840)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10052443?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Alderman EA, Bourassa M, Brooks MM, et al. Influence of diabetes on 5-year mortality and morbidity
in a randomized trial comparing CABG and PTCA in patients with multivessel disease: the Bypass
Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation (BARI). Circulation. 1997 Sep 16;96(6):1761-9.  Full
text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/96/6/1761)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9323059?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. US Burden of Disease Collaborators, Mokdad AH, Ballestros K, et al. The state of US health,
1990-2016: burden of diseases, injuries, and risk factors among US states. JAMA. 2018 Apr
10;319(14):1444-72.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5933332)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29634829?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
67
=== Page 68 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
REFERENCES
21. Jha P, Ramasundarahettige C, Landsman V, et al. 21st-century hazards of
smoking and benefits of cessation in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2013 Jan
24;368(4):341-50.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMsa1211128?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23343063?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Health effects of cigarette smoking. Oct 2021 [internet
publication].  Full text (https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/health_effects/
effects_cig_smoking/index.htm)
23. Barnoya J, Glantz SA. Cardiovascular effects of secondhand smoke: nearly as large as smoking.
Circulation. 2005 May 24;111(20):2684-98.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/
circulationaha.104.492215)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15911719?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health and Medicine Division; Board
on Population Health and Public Health Practice; Committee on the Review of the Health Effects
of Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems. Public health consequences of e-cigarettes. 2018 Jan 23. 
Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK507171)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29894118?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Willett J, Achenbach S, Pinto FJ, et al. The tobacco endgame: eradicating a worsening epidemic
a joint opinion from the American Heart Association, World Heart Federation, American College of
Cardiology, and the European Society of Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021 Jul 6;78(1):77-81.  Full
text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109721011864?via%3Dihub)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34052093?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Kannel WB, Castelli WP, Gordon T. Cholesterol in the prediction of atherosclerotic disease. New
perspectives based on the Framingham study. Ann Intern Med. 1979 Jan;90(1):85-91. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/217290?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Stamler J, Wentworth D, Neaton JD. Is relationship between serum cholesterol and risk of premature
death from coronary heart disease continuous and graded? Findings in 356,222 primary screenees of
the multiple risk factor intervention trial (MRFIT). JAMA. 1986 Nov 28;256(20):2823-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3773199?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/
APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the management of blood cholesterol: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. Circulation. 2019 Jun 18;139(25):e1082-143.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000625?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub
%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30586774?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Sposito AC, Chapman MJ. Statin therapy in acute coronary syndromes: mechanistic insight
into clinical benefit. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2002 Oct 1;22(10):1524-34.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/01.atv.0000032033.39301.6a)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12377727?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 69 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
30. Nourjah P. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 1997 emergency department summary.
Adv Data. 1999 May 6;(304):1-24.  Full text (https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ad/ad304.pdf)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10662355?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Damluji AA, Forman DE, Wang TY, et al. Management of acute coronary syndrome in the older
adult population: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2023 Jan
17;147(3):e32-62.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001112)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36503287?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention
of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019 Sep 10;140(11):e596-646. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000678)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30879355?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Vasan RS, Pencina MJ, Cobain M, et al. Estimated risks for developing obesity in the Framingham
Heart Study. Ann Intern Med. 2005 Oct 4;143(7):473-80. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16204159?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Messerli FH, Sundgaard-Riise K, Reisin ED, et al. Dimorphic cardiac adaptation to obesity and
arterial hypertension. Ann Intern Med. 1983 Dec;99(6):757-61. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/6651022?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Mokdad AH, Marks JS, Stroup DF, et al. Actual causes of death in the United States, 2000.
JAMA. 2004 Mar 10;291(10):1238-45. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15010446?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. Powell-Wiley TM, Poirier P, Burke LE, et al. Obesity and cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2021 May 25;143(21):e984-e1010.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8493650)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33882682?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Cucoranu DC, Pop M, Niculescu R, et al. Correlation between CT abdominal anthropometric
measurements and liver density in individuals with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Medicina
(Kaunas). 2023 Mar 3;59(3):500.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10053809)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36984501?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Duell PB, Welty FK, Miller M, et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and cardiovascular risk: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2022
Jun;42(6):e168-e185.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/ATV.0000000000000153?
rfr_dat=cr_pub++0pubmed&url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35418240?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Haskell WL, Lee IM, Pate RR, et al. Physical activity and public health: updated recommendation
for adults from the American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007 Aug;39(8):1423-34.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/acsm-msse/
fulltext/2007/08000/Physical_Activity_and_Public_Health__Updated.27.aspx)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17762377?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
69
=== Page 70 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
REFERENCES
40. Franklin BA, Kahn JK, Gordon NF, et al. Cardioprotective "polypill"? Independent and additive benefits
of lifestyle modification. Am J Cardiol. 2004 Jul 15;94(2):162-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15246891?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Anderson L, Thompson DR, Oldridge N, et al. Exercise-based cardiac rehabilitation for coronary
heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Jan 5;(1):CD001800.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD001800.pub3/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26730878?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Qureshi AI, Suri MF, Guterman LR, et al. Cocaine use and the likelihood of nonfatal myocardial
infarction and stroke: data from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey. Circulation. 2001 Jan 30;103(4):502-6.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/01.cir.103.4.502?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub
%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11157713?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Weber JE, Shofer FS, Larkin GL, et al. Validation of a brief observation period for patients
with cocaine-associated chest pain. N Engl J Med. 2003 Feb 6;348(6):510-7.  Full text (https://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa022206)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12571258?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Mittleman MA, Mintzer D, Maclure M, et al. Triggering of myocardial infarction by cocaine. Circulation.
1999 Jun 1;99(21):2737-41.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/01.cir.99.21.2737?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10351966?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Rosengren A, Hawken S, Ounpuu S, et al; INTERHEART investigators. Association of psychosocial
risk factors with risk of acute myocardial infarction in 11119 cases and 13648 controls from 52
countries (the INTERHEART study): case-control study. Lancet. 2004 Sep 11-17;364(9438):953-62.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15364186?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Lichtman JH, Froelicher ES, Blumenthal JA, et al; American Heart Association Statistics Committee
of the Council on Epidemiology and Prevention and the Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke
Nursing. Depression as a risk factor for poor prognosis among patients with acute coronary
syndrome: systematic review and recommendations: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2014 Mar 25;129(12):1350-69.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/
full/10.1161/cir.0000000000000019)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24566200?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Jneid H, Addison D, Bhatt DL, et al. 2017 AHA/ACC clinical performance and quality measures for
adults with ST-elevation and non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Performance Measures. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2017 Oct 17;70(16):2048-90.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/70/16/2048)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28943066?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Fox CS, Muntner P, Chen AY, et al; Acute Coronary Treatment and Intervention Outcomes Network
registry. Use of evidence-based therapies in short-term outcomes of ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction in patients with chronic kidney disease:
a report from the National Cardiovascular Data Acute Coronary Treatment and Intervention Outcomes
70 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 71 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
Network registry. Circulation. 2010 Jan 26;121(3):357-65.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/full/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.865352)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20065168?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Mahaffey KW, Roe MT, Kilaru R, et al. Creatine kinase-MB elevation after coronary artery bypass
grafting surgery in patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes predict worse
outcomes: results from four large clinical trials. Eur Heart J. 2007 Feb;28(4):425-32.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/28/4/425/2887580)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17267458?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Wang X, Ouyang Y, Wang Z, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea and risk of cardiovascular disease
and all-cause mortality: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies. Int J Cardiol. 2013
Nov 5;169(3):207-14.  Full text (https://www.internationaljournalofcardiology.com/article/
S0167-5273(13)01671-9/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24161531?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. GBD 2019 Risk Factors Collaborators. Global burden of 87 risk factors in 204 countries and
territories, 1990-2019: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019.
Lancet. 2020 Oct 17;396(10258):1223-49.  Full text (https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/
article/PIIS0140-6736(20)30752-2)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33069327?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Visseren FLJ, Mach F, Smulders YM, et al. 2021 ESC guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention
in clinical practice. Eur Heart J. 2021 Sep 7;42(34):3227-337.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/42/34/3227/6358713)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34458905?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. US Preventive Services Task Force, Mangione CM, Barry MJ, et al. Statin use for the
primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults: US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. JAMA. 2022 Aug 23;328(8):746-53.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jama/fullarticle/2795521)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35997723?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. US Preventive Services Task Force, Davidson KW, Barry MJ, et al. Aspirin use to prevent
cardiovascular disease: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA.
2022 Apr 26;327(16):1577-84.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2791399)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35471505?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Recent-onset chest pain of suspected cardiac origin:
assessment and diagnosis. November 2016 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/CG95)
56. Writing Committee, Kontos MC, de Lemos JA, et al. 2022 ACC Expert Consensus Decision Pathway
on the evaluation and disposition of acute chest pain in the emergency department: A report of the
American College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Nov
15;80(20):1925-60.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109722066189?
via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36241466?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
71
=== Page 72 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
REFERENCES
57. Writing Committee Members; Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/
SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee On Clinical Practice Guidelines.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021 Nov 30;78(22):e187-285.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0735109721057958)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34756653?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58. Edvardsen T, Asch FM, Davidson B, et al. Non-invasive imaging in coronary syndromes:
recommendations of the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging and the American Society
of Echocardiography, in collaboration with the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Society
of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance.
Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2022 Jan 24;23(2):e6-33.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
ehjcimaging/article/23/2/e6/6423983)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34751391?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Neumann FJ, Sousa-Uva M, Ahlsson A, et al; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2018 ESC/EACTS
guidelines on myocardial revascularization. Eur Heart J. 2019 Jan 7;40(2):87-165.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/advance-article/doi/10.1093/eurheartj/ehy394/5079120)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30165437?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Gholap NN, Mehta RL, Ng L, et al. Is admission blood glucose concentration a more powerful
predictor of mortality after myocardial infarction than diabetes diagnosis? A retrospective cohort study.
BMJ Open. 2012 Sep 25;2(5):e001596.  Full text (https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/2/5/e001596.long) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23015602?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. de Mulder M, Umans VA, Cornel JH, et al. Intensive glucose regulation in hyperglycemic acute
coronary syndrome: results of the randomized BIOMarker study to identify the acute risk of a coronary
syndrome-2 (BIOMArCS-2) glucose trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2013 Nov 11;173(20):1896-904.  Full
text (https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/1735896)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24018647?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Antman EM, Cohen M, Bernink PJ, et al. The TIMI risk score for unstable angina/non-ST
elevation MI: a method for prognostication and therapeutic decision making. JAMA. 2000 Aug
16;284(7):835-42.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/192996)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10938172?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Backus BE, Six AJ, Kelder JC, et al. A prospective validation of the HEART score for chest pain
patients at the emergency department. Int J Cardiol. 2013 Oct 3;168(3):2153-8.  Full text (https://
www.internationaljournalofcardiology.com/article/S0167-5273(13)00315-X/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23465250?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery
revascularization: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee On Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022 Jan 18;145(3):e18-114.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001038)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34882435?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 73 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
65. Lindahl B, Andrén B, Ohlsson J, et al. Risk stratification in unstable coronary artery disease.
Additive value of troponin T determinations and pre-discharge exercise tests. Eur Heart J. 1997
May;18(5):762-70. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9152646?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Nyman I, Larsson H, Areskog M, et al. The predictive value of silent ischemia at an exercise
test before discharge after an episode of unstable coronary artery disease. Am Heart
J. 1992 Feb;123(2):324-31. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1736566?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
67. Fletcher GF, Ades PA, Kligfield P, et al. Exercise standards for testing and training: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2013 Aug 20;128(8):873-934. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/cir.0b013e31829b5b44)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23877260?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. Raff GL, Gallagher MJ, O'Neill WW, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of noninvasive coronary angiography
using 64-slice spiral computed tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005 Aug 2;46(3):552-7. 
Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/46/3/552)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16053973?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
69. Hoffmann U, Truong QA, Schoenfeld DA, et al; ROMICAT-II Investigators. Coronary CT angiography
versus standard evaluation in acute chest pain. N Engl J Med. 2012 Jul 26;367(4):299-308.  Full
text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1201161)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22830462?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. Hendel RC, Patel MR, Kramer CM, et al; American College of Cardiology Foundation Quality Strategic
Directions Committee Appropriateness Criteria Working Group; American College of Radiology;
Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography; Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance;
American Society of Nuclear Cardiology; North American Society for Cardiac Imaging; Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; Society of Interventional Radiology. ACCF/ACR/SCCT/
SCMR/ASNC/NASCI/SCAI/SIR 2006 appropriateness criteria for cardiac computed tomography and
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Oct 3;48(7):1475-97.  Full text (http://
www.onlinejacc.org/content/48/7/1475)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17010819?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
71. Babuin L, Jaffe AS. Troponin: the biomarker of choice for the detection of cardiac injury. CMAJ. 2005
Nov 8;173(10):1191-202.  Full text (http://www.cmaj.ca/content/173/10/1191.full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16275971?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Mujica VR, Jeffrey C. When it's hard to swallow. What to look for in patients with dysphagia.
Postgrad Med J. 1999 Jun;105(7):131-45. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10376055?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Indar AA, Beckingham IJ. Acute cholecystitis. BMJ. 2002 Sep 21;325(7365):639-43.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1124163)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12242178?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
73
=== Page 74 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
REFERENCES
74. Jougon J, Mc Bride T, Delcambre F, et al. Primary esophageal repair for Boerhaave's syndrome
whatever the free interval between perforation and treatment. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2004
Apr;25(4):475-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15037257?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
75. Chu DK, Kim LH, Young PJ, et al. Mortality and morbidity in acutely ill adults treated with liberal
versus conservative oxygen therapy (IOTA): a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet.
2018 Apr 28;391(10131):1693-705. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29726345?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. Siemieniuk RAC, Chu DK, Kim LH, et al. Oxygen therapy for acutely ill medical patients: a
clinical practice guideline. BMJ. 2018 Oct 24;363:k4169. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30355567?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
77. Lewis HD Jr, Davis JW, Archibald DG, et al. Protective effects of aspirin against acute myocardial
infarction and death in men with unstable angina: results of a Veterans Administration Cooperative
Study. N Engl J Med. 1983 Aug 18;309(7):396-403. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/6135989?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
78. Cairns JA, Gent M, Singer J, et al. Aspirin, sulfinpyrazone, or both in unstable angina: results
of a Canadian multicenter trial. N Engl J Med. 1985 Nov 28;313(22):1369-75. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3903504?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
79. Antithrombotic Trialists' Collaboration. Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials of antiplatelet
therapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ. 2002
Jan 12;324(7329):71-86.  Full text (https://www.bmj.com/content/324/7329/71.full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11786451?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80. Motovska Z, Kala P. Benefits and risks of clopidogrel use in patients with coronary artery disease:
evidence from randomized studies and registries. Clin Ther. 2008;30 Pt 2:2191-202. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19281914?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
81. Squizzato A, Bellesini M, Takeda A, et al. Clopidogrel plus aspirin versus aspirin alone for preventing
cardiovascular events. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017 Dec 14;(12):CD005158.  Full text
(https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD005158.pub4/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29240976?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82. Mahaffey KW, Held C, Wojdyla DM, et al; PLATO Investigators. Ticagrelor effects on myocardial
infarction and the impact of event adjudication in the PLATO (Platelet Inhibition and Patient
Outcomes) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Apr 22;63(15):1493-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24561148?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
83. Pollack CV Jr, Davoudi F, Diercks DB, et al; PLATO Investigators. Relative efficacy and safety
of ticagrelor vs clopidogrel as a function of time to invasive management in non-ST-segment
elevation acute coronary syndrome in the PLATO trial. Clin Cardiol. 2017 Jun;40(6):390-8.  Full text
(https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/clc.22733)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28598510?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 75 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
84. Varenhorst C, Alström U, Braun OÖ, et al. Causes of mortality with ticagrelor compared with
clopidogrel in acute coronary syndromes. Heart. 2014 Nov;100(22):1762-9. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24957530?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
85. Bavishi C, Panwar S, Messerli FH, et al. Meta-analysis of comparison of the newer oral P2Y12
inhibitors (prasugrel or ticagrelor) to clopidogrel in patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary
syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2015 Sep 1;116(5):809-17. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/26119655?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
86. Lee CR, Sriramoju VB, Cervantes A, et al. Clinical outcomes and sustainability of using CYP2C19
genotype-guided antiplatelet therapy after percutaneous coronary intervention. Circ Genom
Precis Med. 2018 Apr;11(4):e002069. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29615454?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
87. Bonaca MP, Bhatt DL, Cohen M, et al; PEGASUS-TIMI 54 Steering Committee and Investigators.
Long-term use of ticagrelor in patients with prior myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2015 May
7;372(19):1791-800.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1500857)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25773268?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
88. Patti G, Pasceri V, Mangiacapra F, et al; ARMYDA-8 RELOAD-ACS Investigators. Efficacy of
clopidogrel reloading in patients with acute coronary syndrome undergoing percutaneous coronary
intervention during chronic clopidogrel therapy (from the Antiplatelet Therapy for Reduction of
MYocardial Damage during Angioplasty [ARMYDA-8 RELOAD-ACS] trial). Am J Cardiol. 2013 Jul
15;112(2):162-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23601577?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
89. Meine TJ, Roe MT, Chen AY, et al; CRUSADE Investigators. Association of intravenous
morphine use and outcomes in acute coronary syndromes: results from the CRUSADE Quality
Improvement Initiative. Am Heart J. 2005 Jun;149(6):1043-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15976786?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
90. Kubica J, Adamski P, Ostrowska M, et al. Morphine delays and attenuates ticagrelor exposure
and action in patients with myocardial infarction: the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
IMPRESSION trial. Eur Heart J. 2016 Jan 14;37(3):245-52.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/37/3/245/2467204)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26491112?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
91. American College of Cardiology Foundation, American Health Association, Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, et al. Fact sheet: beta-blockers for acute myocardial infarction. April 2005
[internet publication].  Full text (https://archive.ahrq.gov/clinic/commitfact.htm)
92. American College of Cardiology Foundation, American Health Association, Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, et al. Practice advisory: commitment to respond to COMMIT/CCS-2 trial
beta blocker use for myocardial infarction (MI) within 24 hours of hospital arrival. Apr 2005 [internet
publication].  Full text (https://archive.ahrq.gov/clinic/commitadvisory.htm)
93. Chen ZM, Pan HC, Chen YP, et al; COMMIT (ClOpidogrel and Metoprolol in Myocardial Infarction Trial)
collaborative group. Early intravenous then oral metoprolol in 45,852 patients with acute myocardial
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
75
=== Page 76 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
REFERENCES
infarction: randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2005 Nov 5;366(9497):1622-32. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16271643?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
94. Topol EJ. A guide to therapeutic decision-making in patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute
coronary syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003 Feb 19;41(4 suppl S):S123-9. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12644350?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
95. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Acute coronary syndromes. November 2020
[internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng185)
96. Knuuti J, Wijns W, Saraste A, et al. 2019 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of chronic
coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J. 2020 Jan 14;41(3):407-77.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/41/3/407/5556137)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31504439?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
97. Task Force Members, Montalescot G, Sechtem U, et al. 2013 ESC guidelines on the management of
stable coronary artery disease: the Task Force on the management of stable coronary artery disease
of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2013 Oct;34(38):2949-3003.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/34/38/2949/442952)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23996286?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
98. O'Donoghue M, Boden WE, Braunwald E, et al. Early invasive vs conservative treatment strategies in
women and men with unstable angina and non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: a meta-
analysis. JAMA. 2008 Jul 2;300(1):71-80. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18594042?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
99. Tegn N, Abdelnoor M, Aaberge L, et al; After Eighty study investigators. Invasive versus conservative
strategy in patients aged 80 years or older with non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction or
unstable angina pectoris (After Eighty study): an open-label randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2016 Mar 12;387(10023):1057-65. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26794722?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
100. Bach RG, Cannon CP, Weintraub WS, et al. The effect of routine, early invasive management
on outcome for elderly patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes. Ann
Intern Med. 2004 Aug 3;141(3):186-95. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15289215?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
101. Devlin G, Gore JM, Elliott J, et al; GRACE Investigators. Management and 6-month outcomes in
elderly and very elderly patients with high-risk non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: The
Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events. Eur Heart J. 2008 May;29(10):1275-82.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/29/10/1275/464924)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18387940?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
102. Vranckx P, Frigoli E, Rothenbühler M, et al; MATRIX Investigators. Radial versus femoral access in
patients with acute coronary syndromes with or without ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J. 2017
Apr 7;38(14):1069-80.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/38/14/1069/3058512)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28329389?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 77 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
103. McCullough PA, Adam A, Becker C, et al. Epidemiology and prognostic implications of contrast-
induced nephropathy. Am J Cardiol. 2006 Sep 18;98(6A):5-13K. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16949375?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
104. Andrade-Castellanos CA, Colunga-Lozano LE, Delgado-Figueroa N, et al. Heparin
versus placebo for non-ST elevation acute coronary syndromes. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2014 Jun 27;(6):CD003462.  Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/
doi/10.1002/14651858.CD003462.pub3/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24972265?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
105. Thomas RJ, Beatty AL, Beckie TM, et al. Home-based cardiac rehabilitation: a scientific
statement from the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation, the
American Heart Association, and the American College of Cardiology. Circulation. 2019 Jul
2;140(1):e69-89.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000663?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31082266?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
106. Becker RC, Meade TW, Berger PB, et al; American College of Chest Physicians. The primary and
secondary prevention of coronary artery disease: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-
based clinical practice guidelines (8th edition). Chest. 2008 Jun;133(6 Suppl):776-814S. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18574278?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
107. Harrington RA, Becker RC, Cannon CP, et al; American College of Chest Physicians.
Antithrombotic therapy for non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes: American
College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines (8th edition). Chest.
2008 Jun;133(6 Suppl):670-707S. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18574276?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
108. Briguori C, Visconti G, Focaccio A, et al. Novel approaches for preventing or limiting events (Naples) II
trial: impact of a single high loading dose of atorvastatin on periprocedural myocardial infarction. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2009 Dec 1;54(23):2157-63. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19664895?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
109. Di Sciascio G, Patti G, Pasceri V, et al. Efficacy of atorvastatin reload in patients on chronic statin
therapy undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention: results of the ARMYDA-RECAPTURE
(Atorvastatin for Reduction of Myocardial Damage During Angioplasty) Randomized Trial. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2009 Aug 4;54(6):558-65. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19643320?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
110. Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, et al. Ezetimibe added to statin therapy after acute coronary
syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2015 Jun 18;372(25):2387-97.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJMoa1410489)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26039521?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
111. Tsujita K, Sugiyama S, Sumida H, et al. Impact of dual lipid-lowering strategy with ezetimibe and
atorvastatin on coronary plaque regression in patients with percutaneous coronary intervention: the
multicentre randomized controlled PRECISE-IVUS Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015 Aug 4;66(5):495-507.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26227186?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
77
=== Page 78 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
REFERENCES
112. Sabatine MS, Giugliano RP, Keech AC, et al; FOURIER Steering Committee and Investigators.
Evolocumab and clinical outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med.
2017 May 4;376(18):1713-22.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1615664?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28304224?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
113. Schwartz GG, Steg PG, Szarek M, et al. Alirocumab and cardiovascular outcomes after acute
coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2018 Nov 29;379(22):2097-107.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1801174?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub
%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30403574?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
114. Mehta SR, Cannon CP, Fox KA, et al. Routine vs selective invasive strategies in patients
with acute coronary syndromes: a collaborative meta-analysis of randomized trials. JAMA.
2005 Jun 15;293(23):2908-17. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15956636?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
115. Cannon CP, Weintraub WS, Demopoulos LA, et al. Comparison of early invasive and conservative
strategies in patients with unstable coronary syndromes treated with the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
inhibitor tirofiban. N Engl J Med. 2001 Jun 21;344(25):1879-87.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJM200106213442501)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11419424?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
116. Bavry AA, Kumbhani DJ, Rassi AN, et al. Benefit of early invasive therapy in acute coronary
syndromes: a meta-analysis of contemporary randomized clinical trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006
Oct 3;48(7):1319-25.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/48/7/1319.full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17010789?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
117. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of high
blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National
Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014 Feb 5;311(5):507-20.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/
journals/jama/fullarticle/1791497)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24352797?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
118. Pfeffer MA, McMurray JJ, Velazquez EJ, et al. Valsartan, captopril, or both in myocardial infarction
complicated by heart failure, left ventricular dysfunction, or both. N Engl J Med. 2003 Nov
13;349(20):1893-906.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa032292)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14610160?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
119. Granger CB, McMurray JJ, Yusuf S, et al. Effects of candesartan in patients with chronic heart failure
and reduced left-ventricular systolic function intolerant to angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors: the
CHARM-Alternative trial. Lancet. 2003 Sep 6;362(9386):772-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/13678870?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
120. Dickstein K, Kjekshus J; OPTIMAAL Steering Committee of the OPTIMAAL Study Group. Effects of
losartan and captopril on mortality and morbidity in high-risk patients after acute myocardial infarction:
the OPTIMAAL randomised trial. Optimal Trial in Myocardial Infarction with Angiotensin II Antagonist
78 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 79 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
Losartan. Lancet. 2002;360:752-760. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12241832?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
121. Pitt B, Remme W, Zannad F, et al. Eplerenone, a selective aldosterone blocker, in patients with left
ventricular dysfunction after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2003 Apr 3;348(14):1309-21.  Full
text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa030207)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12668699?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
122. Oldgren J, Wallentin L, Alexander JH, et al. New oral anticoagulants in addition to single or
dual antiplatelet therapy after an acute coronary syndrome: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Eur Heart J. 2013 Jun;34(22):1670-80.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/
article/34/22/1670/502295)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23470494?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
123. Mega JL, Braunwald E, Wiviott SD, et al; ATLAS ACS 2–TIMI 51 Investigators. Rivaroxaban in
patients with a recent acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2012 Jan 5;366(1):9-19.  Full text
(https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1112277)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22077192?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
124. Mega JL, Braunwald E, Wiviott SD, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and safety of two rivaroxaban
doses in acute coronary syndrome (from ATLAS ACS 2-TIMI 51). Am J Cardiol. 2013 Aug
15;112(4):472-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23711804?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
125. Lip GY, Collet JP, Haude M, et al. Management of antithrombotic therapy in AF patients presenting
with ACS and/or undergoing PCI. Eur Heart J. 2018 Aug 14;39(31):2847-50.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/39/31/2847/5076806)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30137444?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
126. Dewilde WJ, Oirbans T, Verheugt FW, et al; WOEST study investigators. Use of clopidogrel with or
without aspirin in patients taking oral anticoagulant therapy and undergoing percutaneous coronary
intervention: an open-label, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet. 2013 Mar 30;381(9872):1107-15.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23415013?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
127. Cuisset T, Frere C, Quilici J, et al. Benefit of a 600-mg loading dose of clopidogrel on platelet
reactivity and clinical outcomes in patients with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome
undergoing coronary stenting. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Oct 3;48(7):1339-45.  Full text (http://
www.onlinejacc.org/content/48/7/1339)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17010792?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
128. Chen ZM, Jiang LX, Chen YP, et al. Addition of clopidogrel to aspirin in 45 852 patients with acute
myocardial infarction: randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2005 Nov 5;366(9497):1607-21.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16271642?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
129. O'Donoghue ML, Braunwald E, Antman EM, et al. Pharmacodynamic effect and clinical efficacy of
clopidogrel and prasugrel with or without a proton-pump inhibitor: an analysis of two randomised trials.
Lancet. 2009 Sep 19;374(9694):989-97. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19726078?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
79
=== Page 80 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
REFERENCES
130. Mehta SR, Granger CB, Eikelboom JW, et al. Efficacy and safety of fondaparinux versus enoxaparin
in patients with acute coronary syndromes undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention:
results from the OASIS-5 trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 Oct 30;50(18):1742-51. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17964037?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
131. Brown DL, Fann CS, Chang CJ. Meta-analysis of effectiveness and safety of abciximab versus
eptifibatide or tirofiban in percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 2001 Mar 1;87(5):537-41.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11230835?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
132. Leon AS, Franklin BA, Costa F, et al. Cardiac rehabilitation and secondary prevention of coronary
heart disease. Circulation. 2005 Jan 25;111(3):369-76.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/
full/10.1161/01.cir.0000151788.08740.5c)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15668354?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
133. McKenney JM, Davidson MH, Jacobson TA, et al. Final conclusions and recommendations
of the National Lipid Association Statin Safety Assessment Task Force. Am J Cardiol.
2006 Apr 17;97(8A):89-94C. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16581336?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
134. Patel MR, Calhoon JH, Dehmer GJ, et al. ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/SCAI/SCCT/STS 2016
appropriate use criteria for coronary revascularization in patients with acute coronary syndromes:
a report of the American College of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American
Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echocardiography,
American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,
Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2017 Feb 7;69(5):570-91.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/69/5/570)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28012615?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
135. Tracy CM, Epstein AE, Darbar D, et al; American College of Cardiology Foundation; American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines; Heart Rhythm Society. 2012 ACCF/
AHA/HRS focused update of the 2008 guidelines for device-based therapy of cardiac rhythm
abnormalities: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation.
2012 Oct 2;126(14):1784-800. [Erratum in: Circulation. 2013 Jan 22;127(3):e357-9.]  Full text
(http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/126/14/1784.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22965336?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
136. Smith SC Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al; World Heart Federation and the Preventive
Cardiovascular Nurses Association. AHA/ACCF secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy for
patients with coronary and other atherosclerotic vascular disease: 2011 update: a guideline from the
American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology Foundation. Circulation. 2011 Nov
29;124(22):2458-73.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/cir.0b013e318235eb4d)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22052934?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
137. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention
of cardiovascular disease in women - 2011 update: a guideline from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2011 Mar 22;123(11):1243-62.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/
80 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 81 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
full/10.1161/cir.0b013e31820faaf8)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21325087?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
138. Grines CL, Bonow RO, Casey DE Jr, et al. Prevention of premature discontinuation of dual antiplatelet
therapy in patients with coronary artery stents. Circulation. 2007 Feb 13;115(6):813-8.  Full
text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/circulationaha.106.180944)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17224480?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
139. Zaman S, Kovoor P. Sudden cardiac death early after myocardial infarction: pathogenesis,
risk stratification, and primary prevention. Circulation. 2014 Jun 10;129(23):2426-35.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/circulationaha.113.007497)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24914016?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
140. Moss AJ, Hall WJ, Cannom DSN, et al; Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial
Investigators. Improved survival with an implanted defibrillator in patients with coronary disease at
high risk for ventricular arrhythmia. N Engl J Med. 1996 Dec 26;335(26):1933-40.  Full text (https://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199612263352601)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/8960472?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
141. Moss AJ, Zareba W, Hall WJ, et al; Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial II
Investigators. Prophylactic implantation of a defibrillator in patients with myocardial infarction and
reduced ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2002 Mar 21;346(12):877-83.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa013474)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11907286?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
142. Hohnloser SH, Kuck KH, Dorian P, et al; DINAMIT Investigators. Prophylactic use of an
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator after acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2004 Dec
9;351(24):2481-8.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa041489)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15590950?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
143. Radovanovic D, Seifert B, Urban P, et al; AMIS Plus Investigators. Validity of Charlson
Comorbidity Index in patients hospitalised with acute coronary syndrome. Insights from the
nationwide AMIS Plus registry 2002-2012. Heart. 2014 Feb;100(4):288-94.  Full text (https://
heart.bmj.com/content/100/4/288.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24186563?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
144. Szummer K, Wallentin L, Lindhagen L, et al. Relations between implementation of new treatments and
improved outcomes in patients with non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction during the last 20 years:
experiences from SWEDEHEART registry 1995 to 2014. Eur Heart J. 2018 Nov 7;39(42):3766-76. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/39/42/3766/5103432)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30239671?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
145. Jeger RV, Radovanovic D, Hunziker PR, et al; AMIS Plus Registry Investigators. Ten-year trends in the
incidence and treatment of cardiogenic shock. Ann Intern Med. 2008 Nov 4;149(9):618-26. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18981487?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
146. Law MR, Watt HC, Wald NJ. The underlying risk of death after myocardial infarction in the absence
of treatment. Arch Intern Med. 2002 Nov 25;162(21):2405-10.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
81
=== Page 82 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction References
REFERENCES
journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/214413)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12437397?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
147. Awad HH, Anderson FA Jr, Gore JM, et al. Cardiogenic shock complicating acute coronary syndromes:
insights from the Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events. Am Heart J. 2012 Jun;163(6):963-71.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22709748?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
148. Hochman JS, Buller CE, Sleeper LA, et al; SHOCK Investigators. Cardiogenic shock complicating
acute myocardial infarction - etiologies, management and outcome: a report from the SHOCK Trial
Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000 Sep;36(3 Suppl A):1063-70. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10985706?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
149. Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al; SHOCK Investigators. Early revascularization in acute
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. N Engl J Med. 1999 Aug 26;341(9):625-34. 
Full text (https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199908263410901)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10460813?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
150. Batra G, Svennblad B, Held C, et al. All types of atrial fibrillation in the setting of myocardial infarction
are associated with impaired outcome. Heart. 2016 Jun 15;102(12):926-33. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26928408?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
151. Goldberg RJ, Yarzebski J, Spencer FA, et al. Thirty-year trends (1975-2005) in the magnitude,
patient characteristics, and hospital outcomes of patients with acute myocardial infarction
complicated by ventricular fibrillation. Am J Cardiol. 2008 Dec 15;102(12):1595-601.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2605953)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19064011?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
152. Rinde LB, Lind C, Småbrekke B, et al. Impact of incident myocardial infarction on the risk of venous
thromboembolism: the Tromsø Study. J Thromb Haemost. 2016 Jun;14(6):1183-91.  Full text
(https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jth.13329)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27061154?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
153. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration of
dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016 Sep
6;68(10):1082-115.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/68/10/1082)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27036918?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
154. Eisenberg MJ, Windle SB, Roy N, et al. Varenicline for smoking cessation in hospitalized
patients with acute coronary syndrome. Circulation. 2016 Jan 5;133(1):21-30.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/circulationaha.115.019634)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26553744?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 83 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Images
Images
Figure 1: ECG showing ST depression
From the personal collection of Dr Syed W. Yusuf and Dr Iyad N. Daher, Department of Cardiology, University
of Texas, Houston; used with permission
Figure 2: ECG showing ST depression
From the personal collection of Dr Syed W. Yusuf and Dr Iyad N. Daher, Department of Cardiology, University
of Texas, Houston; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
83
=== Page 84 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Images
IMAGES
Figure 3: 64-slice CT angiography (A) and conventional angiography (B) showing a high-grade lesion in the
mid-right coronary artery, indicated by the arrows. The arrowheads show artifacts that may be mistaken for
lesions
From: Schussler JM and Grayburn PA. Heart. 2007 Mar;93(3):290-7
84 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 85 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Images
Figure 4: 64-slice CT angiography of a patient with stable angina showing 3D reconstruction (A), curved
reformatted images (B) and confirmation of a high-grade lesion on conventional angiography (C). The
arrowheads show calcified plaques. Dx= diagnosis
From: Schussler JM and Grayburn PA. Heart. 2007 Mar;93(3):290-7
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
85
=== Page 86 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
86 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 87 ===
Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 25, 2023.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
87
=== Page 88 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Mahi L. Ashwath, MD, MBA, FACC, FASE, FSCMR
Director, Cardiac MRI
Clinical Professor of Medicine and Radiology, Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, University of Iowa Health Care, Iowa, IA
DISCLOSURES: MLA declares that she is a member of the Board of Governors of the American College of
Cardiology.
Sanjay Gandhi, MD, MBA, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI
Director, Endovascular Cardiology
Professor of Medicine, Endovascular Cardiology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
DISCLOSURES: SG declares that he is Senior Director of Medical Strategy and Innovation for the US
market at Philips. SG is a senior advisor at Emeritus. SG is a voluntary board member of the American
College of Cardiology (ACC) National Cardiovascular Data Registry oversight committee, the Chest Pain
Myocardial Infarction registry steering committee, and the ACC finance committee.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Mahi L. Ashwath and Dr Sanjay Gandhi would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Cody Deen, Dr Sripal
Bangalore, Dr Mina Owlia, Dr Thomas Vanhecke, and Dr Dena Krishnan, the previous contributors to this
topic.
DISCLOSURES: CSD was previously the Director of Cardiac Rehab for Chatham Hospital, which was
financially set up as a consultancy relationship, until 2017. CSD has spoken (unpaid) at the Update in
Cardiology and Update in Internal Medicine Conferences at UNC for the last 5 years. CSD has served as
the PI for the Dal-GeneE (site now closed) and the ACCELERATE Trials at the University of North Carolina
(trial now completed). Each trial required paid travel to an investigator meeting. SB, MO, TV, and DK declare
that they have no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Syed Wamique Yusuf, MBBS, FRCPI
Professor of Medicine
Department of Cardiology, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
DISCLOSURES: SWY declares that he has no competing interests.
