# Orthostatic hypotension

=== Page 1 ===
Orthostatic
hypotension
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Dec 13, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Etiology  4
Pathophysiology  5
Case history  5
Diagnosis  6
Approach  6
History and exam  8
Risk factors  10
Tests  12
Differentials  17
Criteria  18
Screening  18
Management  19
Approach  19
Treatment algorithm overview  21
Treatment algorithm  22
Emerging  26
Primary prevention  26
Secondary prevention  26
Patient discussions  26
Follow up  27
Monitoring  27
Complications  27
Prognosis  28
Guidelines  29
Diagnostic guidelines  29
Treatment guidelines  30
Online resources  31
References  32
Disclaimer  40
=== Page 3 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Overview
Summary
Orthostatic hypotension (OH) is an independent predictor of mortality and the cause of significant morbidity
associated with falls.
A common problem in frail older people. OH-related hospitalizations increase markedly with age.
Common causes include drugs (e.g., alpha-blockers, central sympatholytics, tricyclic antidepressants,
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, and antihypertensives, including beta-blockers), diseases causing peripheral
neuropathy (e.g., diabetes mellitus and amyloidosis), and synucleinopathies (i.e., Parkinson disease,
dementia with Lewy bodies, pure autonomic failure, and multiple system atrophy or Shy-Drager syndrome).
Acute or subacute onset suggests an autoimmune or paraneoplastic disorder.
OH is increasingly recognized as a common comorbidity of hypertension, both because of the
pathophysiology of hypertension itself, and also because the measurement of OH is derived from the
difference between two blood pressures (lying or sitting, and standing), the absolute value of which will be
greater with a higher starting blood pressure.
Treatment consists of addressing any underlying pathology, when possible, followed by discontinuing
or reducing the dose of aggravating drugs, and introducing nonpharmacologic countermeasures
(e.g., liberalization of salt intake, use of abdominal binders or compression stockings). Short-acting
vasopressors, such as midodrine, or droxidopa (a norepinephrine prodrug) are adjunctive therapies when
nonpharmacologic measures are insufficient. Volume expansion (using mineralocorticoid therapy) may be
used after these therapies due to limited evidence for its use, and a number of undesirable adverse effects.
Definition
OH is defined as a fall in systolic blood pressure of at least 20 mmHg (at least 30 mmHg in patients with
hypertension) and/or a fall in diastolic blood pressure of at least 10 mmHg within 3 minutes of standing.[1]
When OH has an underlying neurogenic cause (e.g., peripheral neuropathy or synucleinopathies) it is
associated with a blunted increase in heart rate, typically less than 15 bpm.[2]
OH becomes clinically significant if it is accompanied by symptoms of cerebral hypoperfusion, which can
lead to syncope and falls.[3] OH is associated with increased risk of dementia and cardiovascular disease,
and is an independent risk factor for all-cause mortality.[4] [5] [6] This topic concentrates on OH caused by
autonomic problems.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
The prevalence of OH is greater in older people, but varies widely depending on the underlying medical
condition.
Systematic reviews suggest OH prevalence of 19% to 22% in community-dwelling adults.[7] [8] US
population-based studies reported OH in less than 5% of people ages ≤54 years, approximately 14% of
those ages 65 to 69 years, and in 20% or more of those ages ≥80 years.[9] [10] [11] Prevalence increases
considerably among older people in nursing homes (31% to 37%) or geriatric floors (68%).[7] [12] [13] [14]
The high prevalence among institutionalized patients probably reflects the presence of multiple risk factors in
this population, such as neurodegenerative diseases that cause OH, the use of medications that may impair
a proper response to postural changes (e.g., antihypertensives, antidepressants), and physical inactivity
leading to deconditioning.
OH is an independent risk factor for mortality and cardiovascular comorbidities linked to increased hospital
admissions. A number of studies have found that sufferers had a higher risk of developing heart failure,
atrial fibrillation, coronary heart disease, myocardial infarction, and ischemic stroke. Therefore, it may be
a significant yet under-recognized risk factor for cardiovascular disease-related morbidity and mortality,
especially among older adults.[15]
It is also associated with a number of noncardiovascular adverse outcomes, including falls, fractures,
syncope, cognitive decline or dementia, depression, frailty, and early death. Whether OH is a causal factor
in the development of these adverse outcomes is a focus of ongoing debate. It is thought that hypoperfusion
of skeletal muscle, heart, and brain may cause progressive organ injury. However, emerging evidence also
suggests a role for comorbid hypertension in the supine or seated positions as the primary driver of injury
and adverse outcomes.[16] [17] It is equally possible that the combination of high and low blood pressure,
that is, blood pressure variability, may drive clinical events.[15]
Etiology
Healthy aging is associated with decreased autonomic buffering capacity, which can impair adaptation
to orthostatic stress. This predisposes older people to orthostatic hypotension (OH), which may be
triggered by medications (e.g., alpha-blockers [used for treating conditions such as benign prostatic
hypertrophy], central sympatholytics, including tizanidine [used as a muscle relaxant] and methyldopa [used
as an antihypertensive], tricyclic antidepressants, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors [used to treat erectile
dysfunction], and antihypertensives, including beta-blockers) or other circumstances (e.g., volume depletion,
physical deconditioning due to prolonged bed rest).[18]
Many diseases that cause peripheral neuropathy (most notably diabetes mellitus and amyloidosis) can
produce autonomic neuropathy and neurogenic OH.[19] [20]
Patients with Parkinson disease and dementia with Lewy bodies, two related conditions, frequently suffer
neurogenic OH of varying severity. Other neurodegenerative disorders that affect the autonomic nervous
system are less common but are associated with severe OH. These include pure autonomic failure (a Lewy
body synucleinopathy in which mostly the peripheral autonomic nerves are involved, without a movement
disorder phenotype) and multiple system atrophy (MSA, previously called Shy-Drager syndrome), which can
have atypical parkinsonian features (MSA-P) or symptoms of cerebellar ataxia (MSA-C).[21]
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Theory
An acute or subacute onset of progressive autonomic failure may be caused by an autoimmune autonomic
ganglionopathy (often with antibodies against the ganglionic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor) or a
paraneoplastic syndrome (most often small cell lung cancer, monoclonal gammopathies, or light-chain
disease).[22]
Pathophysiology
When a healthy person stands, about 700 mL of blood pools in the leg veins and the lower abdominal
veins. Venous return to the heart decreases, resulting in a transient decline in cardiac output. This leads
to baroreflex-mediated sympathetic activation with an increase in cardiac stroke volume and peripheral
vasoconstriction, as well as parasympathetic withdrawal with an increase in heart rate. These rapid
hemodynamic changes prevent blood pressure from falling.
Failure of these mechanisms causes OH. Cerebral blood flow normally remains constant throughout a
wide range of blood pressures by autoregulation, but the mechanism is overwhelmed when systolic blood
pressure is around 50 mmHg at brain level (about 70 mmHg at cardiac level when a person is standing),
leading to lightheadedness and syncope.
Case history
Case history #1
A 75-year-old man presents to the emergency department after a syncopal episode when he got
up at night to urinate. He has recently been started on the alpha-blocker tamsulosin at bedtime
after complaining of urinary frequency and a weak urinary stream, and physical exam had revealed
an enlarged prostate. On questioning, he says that he has previously had occasional episodes of
lightheadedness when standing for prolonged periods in church or when gardening on a hot day.
Case history #2
A 56-year-old obese woman with a 12-year history of diabetes mellitus that has not been well controlled
presents with lightheadedness on standing, relieved by sitting down. She has not had syncopal spells,
but these episodes of lightheadedness are worse after meals and are impairing her quality of life. She
also admits to burning pain in her feet and lower legs that is more severe at night and associated with
numbness and inappropriate pain and discomfort to touch (allodynia).
Other presentations
Other symptoms include dizziness, weakness, faintness, fatigue on exertion, and dimming of the vision
(tunnel vision or visual blackouts). Symptoms do not occur while supine, generally get worse on standing,
and are relieved by sitting or lying down. Aggravating factors can often be identified, and the symptoms
are often worse early in the morning, in hot weather, after meals, after long periods of standing still, or
when the arms are raised above heart level. However, some patients may have difficulty recognizing or
describing symptoms of orthostatic hypotension and may present with recurrent unexplained falls.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Approach
Orthostatic hypotension (OH) is defined as a fall in systolic blood pressure of at least 20 mmHg (at least 30
mmHg in patients with hypertension) and/or a fall in diastolic blood pressure of at least 10 mmHg within 3
minutes of standing.[1]
A fall in systolic blood pressure of at least 15 mmHg can be used when measuring orthostatic vitals from the
seated, rather than supine, posture.[27]
Measurement of blood pressure
Diagnosis requires measurement of blood pressure in the supine and standing postures.[28] [29] It
is advisable to take multiple blood pressure measurements.[30] There is evidence to suggest that
measurements made at home by the patient may be more effective in detecting OH.[31] [32]
Heart rate should be recorded at the same time as the blood pressure measurements, as the expected
tachycardia in response to hypotension is blunted (typically less than 15 bpm increase in heart rate),
when there is an underlying neurogenic cause (e.g., peripheral neuropathy).[2] 
These measurements, however, are rarely carried out routinely, so a careful history is crucial to identify
OH as the cause of the patient's symptoms.
History
Lightheadedness is the typical symptom of OH. Other symptoms include dizziness, weakness, faintness,
fatigue on exertion and dimming of the vision (tunnel vision or visual blackouts).[30]
Symptoms should not occur while supine, should get worse on standing, and should be relieved by sitting
or lying down. Some patients may have difficulty recognizing or describing symptoms of OH and may
present with recurrent or unexplained falls. Patients with dementia in particular may experience a gradual
fading of consciousness or be unaware of losing consciousness.
Aggravating factors can often be identified, and the symptoms are often worse:
• Early in the morning (because of relative volume depletion after overnight fast and pressure
diuresis)
• In hot environments (because of cutaneous vasodilation)
• After meals (because of splanchnic blood pooling)
• After standing motionless (because of decreased venous return caused by loss of muscle pump
action)
• During or after exercise (because of metabolic vasodilation).
Presence of neuropathy
Frequently there is a history of small-fiber neuropathy affecting the lower extremities. Typical symptoms
include pain, dysesthesias (burning, tingling), and decreased sensation. The most common cause is
diabetes mellitus, but any systemic disease that can cause peripheral neuropathy or amyloidosis can also
produce autonomic neuropathy.
A history of an acute or subacute onset of progressive disabling OH can provide diagnostic clues. An
acute pan-dysautonomia may follow a viral-like illness. Antibodies against acetylcholine nicotinic receptors
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
that mediate neurotransmission at the level of the autonomic ganglia have been found in some of these
patients.[22]
Paraneoplastic autoimmune syndromes can also cause subacute OH. The most common causes are
small cell lung cancer, monoclonal gammopathies, and light-chain disease.[22]
Diagnosis of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension
Measuring heart rate alongside blood pressure is crucial in determining if an autonomic neuropathy is
present. OH caused by volume depletion is associated with orthostatic tachycardia. Lack of an adequate
compensatory heart rate increase (>15 bpm) in the face of profound OH (>30 mmHg fall in systolic blood
pressure) is characteristic of neurogenic OH, and few conditions other than autonomic failure can explain
severe OH. A sensitive cut off for diagnosing neurogenic OH is a heart rate rise <0.5 bpm per mmHg
systolic blood pressure fall.[2]
In autonomic failure, the decrease in blood pressure is usually seen immediately upon standing and the
heart rate fails to increase appropriately. This situation is in contrast to that seen in neurally mediated (i.e.,
vasovagal) syncope, in which the initial response to standing is normal, but after a variable period the
patient experiences a sudden onset of hypotension together with a decrease in heart rate.
Other signs of autonomic neuropathy include erectile dysfunction (an early but nonspecific sign),
worsening of constipation, urinary retention, gastroparesis, and decreased sweating (in some cases with
compensatory focal hyperhidrosis). Patients with autonomic failure will often have REM sleep behavior
disorder, which suggests the presence of an underlying neurodegenerative process also involving the
central nervous system. Not infrequently, these patients develop Parkinson disease, dementia with Lewy
bodies, or multiple system atrophy.[2] [33] [34]
Physical exam
Vagal modulation of heart rate is often impaired, and translates into a fixed heart rate that does not
fluctuate during deep breathing (sinus arrhythmia). Parkinsonian features may be present in patients with
multiple system atrophy (MSA, or Shy-Drager syndrome), although the typical parkinsonian pill-rolling
tremor is usually absent. Gait abnormalities and truncal ataxia are present in patients with MSA of the
cerebellar type. Subtle impairment of motor function (reduced frequency of blinking, slow/clumsy rapid
alternating movements) may indicate the early stages of Parkinson disease, dementia with Lewy bodies,
or multiple system atrophy. Symmetric distal sensory loss occurs in patients with diabetic neuropathy or
other forms of peripheral neuropathy.
Investigations
Tilt-table testing is of limited additional value if careful orthostatic vital signs are measured, but it can
aid in the diagnosis of neurally mediated (vasovagal) syncope.[35] In OH, the fall in blood pressure
occurs immediately upon head-up tilt and is usually progressive, whereas in neurally mediated syncope
blood pressure is initially maintained and, after a variable period, blood pressure falls abruptly, often in
association with a drop in heart rate.
Autonomic function tests are useful to confirm the presence of autonomic failure and to assess its
severity.[36] These tests include deep breathing, Valsalva maneuver, measures of heart rate variability,
and 24-hour blood pressure monitoring.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
The use of 24-hour blood pressure monitoring can be useful to find out if supine hypertension is present
at night (which can occur in up to 50% of patients with autonomic failure). It can also be used to detect
early morning and postprandial hypotension if patients are asked to keep a careful diary of activities.
If autonomic dysfunction is suspected, plasma norepinephrine levels may be helpful in determining the
underlying cause of autonomic dysfunction. In healthy people, plasma norepinephrine levels double on
the assumption of the upright posture. In contrast, this response is absent in patients with sympathetic
failure (both pre- and postganglionic). Patients with autonomic disorders that affect postganglionic
sympathetic nerves, such as pure autonomic failure, Parkinson disease, and diabetic neuropathy,
frequently have low plasma norepinephrine levels in the supine position.[37] Patients with autonomic
disorders that selectively affect preganglionic sympathetic neurons (e.g., multiple system atrophy)
typically have normal plasma norepinephrine levels in the supine position.[37]
Nerve conduction studies and electromyogram can be useful for confirming the cause of OH in patients
with peripheral neuropathy related to diabetes mellitus and other causes, although results can be normal
in small-fiber neuropathies. Small-fiber neuropathy can be tested for by quantitative sudomotor axon reflex
testing.
An antibody panel that includes the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor antibody is needed if an autoimmune
process is suspected.[22]
Chest computed tomography should be performed if a paraneoplastic syndrome is suspected, often
because of unintended weight loss accompanying the OH, in order to detect the primary node (which is
often small) and enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. The presence of paraneoplastic antibodies (anti-Hu,
anti-Yo, anti-Ri, antiamphiphysin, anti-CV2, anti-Ma2) should be investigated.
Serum and urine electrophoresis can be performed to rule out a monoclonal gammopathy and light-chain
disease.
Fat aspirate may be needed if amyloidosis is suspected.
Genetic testing for transthyretin familial amyloid polyneuropathy is available.
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
older adult age (common)
• Aging is associated with an increase in resting sympathetic tone, a decrease in parasympathetic
tone, and impairment of baroreflex sensitivity (i.e., the compensatory increase in heart rate as blood
pressure falls).[7]
use of high-risk medications (common)
• Medications such as alpha-blockers (including tamsulosin, used for treating conditions such as
benign prostatic hypertrophy), central sympatholytics (including tizanidine, used as a muscle relaxant,
and methyldopa), tricyclic antidepressants, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (used to treat erectile
dysfunction), and some antihypertensive agents (including beta-blockers) increase the likelihood of
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
orthostatic hypotension.[15] [18] Older patients taking diuretics who become volume depleted are also
at risk.
underlying medical condition (common)
• Conditions that affect autonomic nerve function (e.g., diabetes mellitus, Parkinson disease, multiple
system atrophy) are associated with orthostatic hypotension.
postural lightheadedness, syncope, and other symptoms of cerebral
hypoperfusion (common)
• Symptoms of cerebral hypoperfusion are essential in the evaluation of orthostatic hypotension (OH).
They occur in the upright posture and are the result of inadequate perfusion of the brain, and improve
on sitting or lying down when gravity passively restores cerebral perfusion. Syncope may result from
cerebral hypoperfusion.
• Additional symptoms of hypoperfusion include visual changes, weakness, fatigue, trouble
concentrating, and pain across the neck and shoulders.
• Increased ventilation and dyspnea also occur during OH, and can result in constriction of the cerebral
blood vessels and worsening of cerebral hypoperfusion.
Other diagnostic factors
parkinsonian features (common)
• Parkinsonian features (e.g., resting tremor, slowness, paucity of movement, decreased arm swing
when walking) suggest a problem with motor pathways. In the early stages, these abnormalities can be
mild. REM sleep behavior disorder (acting out dreams) and inability to discriminate smells (anosmia)
can be other indicators of the early stages of Parkinson disease. The same disease process can also
affect pathways that control the outflow of sympathetic nerves to the blood vessels. The prevalence
of orthostatic hypotension in patients with multiple system atrophy and Parkinson disease is markedly
increased.
cerebellar ataxia (common)
• Multiple system atrophy (MSA, or Shy-Drager syndrome) affects autonomic pathways and can result
in orthostatic hypotension. Ataxia of gait and ataxia of speech (cerebellar dysarthria) are the most
common clinical features of the cerebellar form of MSA. Limb ataxia may also occur, but it is less
common.
weight loss (common)
• Unintentional weight loss can be a sign of cancer. In a patient with an acute- or subacute-onset
orthostatic hypotension, unintentional weight loss may suggest a paraneoplastic syndrome in which
the autoimmune process damages the autonomic nervous system.
resting tachycardia or impaired heart rate variation (common)
• May be a feature of diabetic loss of parasympathetic nerves innervating the heart. This results in an
increase in resting heart rate and diminished heart rate variability during deep breathing.
abnormal gastrointestinal motility (common)
• Symptoms of abnormal gastrointestinal motility (e.g., nausea, postprandial vomiting, bloating, loss
of appetite, early satiety, constipation, ileus, abdominal pain) are common in patients with autonomic
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
neuropathy. The incidence of constipation (<3 bowel movements/week) is increased in patients with
Parkinson disease, and can precede the development of overt parkinsonian features by many years.
erectile dysfunction and lack of ejaculation (common)
• Erection requires vascular and autonomic integrity. Erectile dysfunction is common in older men and
is almost universal in men with autonomic failure. It is often associated with lack of ejaculation. The
two features together suggest an underlying autonomic abnormality affecting parasympathetic function
(erection) and sympathetic function (ejaculation).
anhidrosis, heat intolerance, dry skin, focal hyperhidrosis (common)
• Autonomic failure is often associated with abnormalities in sweat function, and patients with autonomic
failure frequently report diminished sweating (anhidrosis), limiting their tolerance of hot environments.
This is in contrast to patients with vasovagal syncope, who will frequently describe a cold sweat before
an impending faint.
urinary frequency, urgency, nocturia (common)
• Problems with bladder function are common in patients with autonomic failure and may be incorrectly
attributed to benign prostatic hypertrophy in older men. Urinary frequency, urgency, and retention have
been reported in patients with Parkinson disease. It is common in multiple system atrophy and, as
the disease progresses, postvoid residual urinary volume increases and patients may require self-
catheterization.
• Nocturia is extremely common in patients with autonomic failure and occurs as a result of loss of
circadian blood pressure rhythm. Instead of the normal night-time "dipping," blood pressure throughout
the night while lying flat in bed is elevated in patients with autonomic failure. As a result, there is an
increase in fluid and sodium loss overnight, causing nocturia. Excessive fluid loss overnight results in
worsening of symptoms of orthostatic hypotension in the morning.
Risk factors
Strong
older adult age
• Aging is associated with an increase in resting sympathetic tone, a decrease in parasympathetic
tone, and impairment of baroreflex sensitivity (i.e., the compensatory increase in heart rate as blood
pressure falls).[7]
• These physiologic changes predispose to orthostatic hypotension (OH), although overall, clinically
significant symptomatic OH is relatively uncommon in healthy elderly people.[23]
frailty and physical deconditioning
• Prolonged bed rest and general frailty can make normal age-related reduction in baroreflex buffering
clinically significant, leading to symptomatic OH. It can also cause skeletal and cardiac muscle
atrophy, leading to reduced cardiac output.[23]
use of drugs that impair sympathetic tone
• Medications such as alpha-blockers (including tamsulosin, used for treating conditions such as
benign prostatic hypertrophy), central sympatholytics (including tizanidine, used as a muscle relaxant,
and methyldopa), tricyclic antidepressants, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (used to treat erectile
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
dysfunction), and some antihypertensive agents (including beta-blockers), increase the likelihood of
OH.[15] [18]
volume depletion/anemia
• A major risk factor for orthostatic hypotension (OH), especially in older patients taking diuretics.
Because blood pressure is dependent on intravascular volume, anemia may exacerbate OH by
reducing red blood cell mass and blood viscosity.
autonomic neuropathy (e.g., diabetes mellitus)
• Any disease causing peripheral neuropathy can affect autonomic nerves. Many patients with diabetes
have detectable autonomic abnormalities, but clinically significant orthostatic hypotension (OH) is more
common in longstanding diabetes.[19] [20]
• Toxins and antineoplastic agents can also produce autonomic neuropathy and therefore OH.
Parkinson disease
• Protein (alpha-synuclein) deposits can occur in peripheral autonomic nerves and autonomic ganglia,
which can produce autonomic abnormalities, including clinically significant OH.[21]
dementia with Lewy bodies
• Protein (alpha-synuclein) deposits can occur in peripheral autonomic nerves and autonomic ganglia,
which can produce autonomic abnormalities, including clinically significant OH.[21]
multiple system atrophy
• Protein (alpha-synuclein) deposits can occur in central autonomic pathways, which can produce
autonomic abnormalities, including clinically significant OH.[21]
hypertension
• Strongly correlated with orthostatic hypotension for complex reasons, principally because of the
reduced diastolic filling and arterial stiffness that is prevalent among hypertensive patients, as well as
the exaggerated threshold effect for patients with high supine or seated baseline blood pressure.[15]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
posture test
• The initial test to diagnose orthostatic hypotension (OH). Blood
pressure should be measured supine or sitting, and after standing for
3 minutes.[29] A fall in systolic blood pressure of at least 15 mmHg
can be used when measuring orthostatic vitals from the seated,
rather than supine, posture.[27]
• It is advisable to take multiple BP measurements.[30] There is
evidence to suggest that measurements made at home by the patient
may be more effective in detecting OH.[31]
• Heart rate should be recorded at the same time as the blood
pressure measurements, as the expected tachycardia in response
to hypotension is blunted (typically less than 15 bpm in heart rate)
when there is an underlying neurogenic cause (e.g., peripheral
neuropathy).[2] 
• These measurements, however, are rarely done routinely, so a
careful history is crucial to suspect OH as the cause of the patient's
symptoms.
• In patients who have OH caused by impaired autonomic
cardiovascular reflexes, the increase in heart rate that accompanies
the fall in blood pressure is typically diminished (<10 bpm). However,
in some patients, particularly those with multiple system atrophy, the
heart rate may increase as much as 20 bpm when the fall in blood
pressure is profound. Thus, the ratio of heart rate increase to blood
pressure fall is a more precise measure of baroreflex impairment.
• A normal rise in heart rate accompanying the fall in blood pressure
is typical of patients with depletion of intravascular volume (from
dehydration or hemorrhage) or impaired vasoconstrictor tone (usually
caused by drugs).
systolic blood pressure
falls >20 mmHg (>30
mmHg in patients with
hypertension) and
diastolic blood pressure
falls >10 mmHg within
3 minutes of standing
upright; a heart rate
increase <0.5 bpm per
mmHg systolic blood
pressure fall indicates a
neurogenic cause
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
Other tests to consider
Test Result
tilt-table test
• Can be useful when orthostatic hypotension (OH) is not detected
during the posture test and the patient gives a history suggestive of
OH.
• Blood pressure and heart rate (by means of RR intervals on ECG)
are measured continuously in the supine position and during passive
head-up tilt (usually at 60°).
• Upright tilt induces a progressive fall in blood pressure in patients
with impaired autonomic cardiovascular reflexes. The increase
in heart rate is either absent or abnormally low considering the
magnitude of the blood pressure fall.
• A fall in blood pressure on head-up tilt accompanied by a large rise
(>25 bpm) in heart rate suggests dehydration or impaired vasomotor
tone (e.g., varicose veins), frequently as a result of the use of
antihypertensive drugs.
• Maintenance of blood pressure on upright posture rules out chronic
severe OH (i.e., autonomic failure). It does not, however, rule out
the possibility of OH that occurs only with aggravating factors such
as eating (postprandial hypotension) or exercise. If postprandial
hypotension is suspected, the tilt-table test can be repeated after a
carbohydrate-rich meal.
• Delayed OH can occur, and requires prolonged tilt (of up to 40
minutes).
beat-to-beat recordings of
blood pressure and heart
rate reveal an immediate
and progressive decline
in blood pressure with a
small increase in heart
rate on head-up tilt
plasma norepinephrine
• Patients with autonomic disorders that affect postganglionic
sympathetic nerves, such as pure autonomic failure and diabetic
neuropathy, frequently have low plasma norepinephrine levels in the
supine position.[37] In contrast, patients with autonomic disorders
that selectively affect preganglionic sympathetic neurons (e.g.,
multiple system atrophy) typically have normal plasma norepinephrine
levels in the supine position.[37]
• In normal people, plasma norepinephrine levels double on the
assumption of the upright posture. In contrast, this response
is absent in patients with sympathetic failure (both pre- and
postganglionic).
blunted increase in
norepinephrine on
standing; plasma
norepinephrine levels
<150 pg/mL usually
indicate a severe
peripheral neuropathy
deep breathing
• Heart rate variability during deep paced breathing (6 breaths/min)
is performed as part of a battery of autonomic tests in patients with
suspected dysautonomias.
• Normally, during inspiration, heart rate increases (RR intervals
shorten) and during expiration heart rate decreases (RR intervals
lengthen). Diminished variation in RR intervals during inspiration and
expiration indicates an abnormality in parasympathetic outflow to the
heart. Heart rate variability diminishes with age and is decreased in
patients with parasympathetic neuropathy (most frequently due to
diabetes). The degree of heart rate variability impairment in diabetes
correlates with morbidity and mortality.
• This test cannot be interpreted in patients with pacemakers; the test
can be difficult to interpret in patients with frequent arrhythmias.
diminished beat-to-beat
variation on ECG during
inspiration and expiration
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
Valsalva maneuver
• The Valsalva maneuver is a standard test performed in patients with
suspected dysautonomia. It is performed by having the patient blow
forcefully, maintaining a pressure of 40 mmHg for 15 seconds. The
decrease in venous return and stroke volume lowers blood pressure
during strain, and elicits sympathetic activation with partial restoration
of blood pressure and compensatory tachycardia. Upon release,
venous return and cardiac output is restored on a vasoconstricted
vascular bed leading to a blood pressure overshoot and reflex
bradycardia.
• In normal subjects, the magnitude of the blood pressure and heart
rate response during and after release of the strain decrease with
age.
• In patients with impaired autonomic cardiovascular reflexes, blood
pressure falls progressively and markedly during forced expiration
and the heart rate increases little. A failure of the blood pressure to
increase (overshoot) after releasing the strain indicates sympathetic
dysfunction, with an abnormality in the sympathetic outflow to the
blood vessels. Blood pressure also takes longer to return to baseline
levels after release of the strain.
• The Valsalva maneuver requires continuous blood pressure
monitoring, and a significant degree of patient cooperation and the
ability to generate the strain pressure. If the patient is not able to
perform the maneuver adequately, the result cannot be interpreted.
failure of the blood
pressure to recover during
strain, and to overshoot
after release
nerve conduction studies and electromyogram (EMG)
• Nerve conduction studies and EMG can be abnormal in diabetes
mellitus and in other forms of peripheral neuropathy, but they can be
normal in small-fiber neuropathies.
reduction in sensory
nerve conduction
velocity; muscle
denervation
quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test (QSART)
• QSART examines the integrity of peripheral sympathetic cholinergic
function, which may be affected in patients with generalized
autonomic failure, and absence of sweat production suggests a
problem with peripheral autonomic nerves.
absence or decrease of
sweat production
heart rate variability
• Continuous ECG traces show a variation in RR intervals, reflecting
changes in autonomic outflow to the sinoatrial node. Spectral analysis
of RR variability in predefined high-frequency (HF) bands (0.15 Hz
up to 0.40 Hz) and low-frequency (LF) bands (0.04 Hz up to 0.14 Hz)
are complementary ways of measuring autonomic (sympathetic and
parasympathetic) innervation to the sinoatrial node.
• To standardize values, RR intervals should be measured for 500
seconds during quiet supine rest. Ectopic beats need to be removed
from the tracings.
• Decreased heart rate variability at the predefined bands suggests
impaired sympathetic or parasympathetic outflow.
• The variability in heart rate decreases with age and reduced fitness
levels. Heart rate variability is also reduced in patients with disorders
that affect autonomic function (e.g., diabetes mellitus, Parkinson
disease, multiple system atrophy). In patients with impaired
autonomic reflexes, there is often a reduction in overall power in the
HF and LF bands of heart rate variability.
• Time domain measures of heart rate variability (including standard
deviation, root mean squared standard deviation, and percentage of
decreased heart rate
variability
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
Test Result
sequential RR intervals that differ by 50 milliseconds or more) are
also diminished.
• These tests cannot be used as a standalone measure to diagnose
autonomic dysfunction.
24-hour blood pressure monitoring
• Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring should be ordered in patients
with a history suggesting symptomatic orthostatic hypotension
(OH), particularly when OH is not detected during regular autonomic
testing.
• Ambulatory monitoring involves intermittent recordings of blood
pressure (and heart rate) over 24 hours while the patient is awake
and asleep. Patients should keep a diary in which they record
symptoms, meal times, medications, posture, and sleep time.
• Normally, there is a fall both in blood pressure and in heart rate at
night during sleep. In patients with impaired autonomic reflexes
this night-time "dipping" is often absent; 50% of patients have
hypertension during the night. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
can also identify episodes of hypotension not seen during office
testing. Ambulatory monitoring is useful to detect episodes of
hypotension that occur only after meals or after exercise.
• Ambulatory recordings allow correlation between symptoms and
blood pressure values and are a useful tool to guide the treatment.
episodes of low blood
pressure, either when
standing or after eating;
absence of the normal
night-time "dipping" in
blood pressure
autoimmune antibodies
• The presence of paraneoplastic antibodies (anti-Hu, anti-Yo, anti-
Ri, antiamphiphysin, anti-CV2, anti-Ma2) suggests a paraneoplastic
disorder.
• In patients with acute or subacute onset of orthostatic hypotension
(OH) who have risk factors for breast or lung cancer or have had
sudden weight loss, the autoimmune antibody panel should be used
to rule out a paraneoplastic syndrome.
• Autoantibodies against the nicotinic ganglionic receptors occur in
some patients and result in severe OH. These patients have an
autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
• More than half of patients presenting with acute or subacute
OH, accompanied by other autonomic abnormalities such as
gastrointestinal dysfunction, are seronegative (i.e., no known
pathogenic antibodies are detected).
high antibody titers
chest CT
• In a patient with orthostatic hypotension found to have high
autoimmune antibodies, chest CT can rule out small cell lung
carcinoma as the underlying source of the paraneoplastic antibodies
by visualizing small nodules that would be undetectable by x-ray, or
enlarged lymph nodes.
• If the chest CT is negative in such a patient, other cancer screens
should be carried out (e.g., breast, ovary).
• However, paraneoplastic syndromes can occur without a detectable
tumor mass.
tumor mass detected on
chest CT as a source of
paraneoplastic antibodies
serum and urine electrophoresis
• Gammopathies can be associated with autonomic neuropathies.
• A normal serum electrophoresis does not rule out light-chain disease,
and urine electrophoresis may be required.
high levels of monoclonal
proteins
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
fat-pad biopsy
• Amyloid deposits can result in a polyneuropathy and orthostatic
hypotension.
amyloid deposits in fat
genetic testing
• Genetic testing may be used for suspected transthyretin familial
amyloid polyneuropathy, which can cause autonomic dysfunction and
orthostatic hypotension.
• Genes can be tested by direct sequencing.
positive
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Neurally mediated
(vasovagal) syncope
• Premonitory symptoms such
as sweating and nausea/
gastric discomfort are
typical of neurally mediated
(vasovagal) syncope, but
do not occur in patients with
chronic autonomic failure.
• Symptoms of neurally
mediated syncope are
intermittent and frequently
occur with specific triggers
(e.g., blood drawing,
prolonged standing,
emotional upset). In between
episodes, blood pressure
responses are normal, and
symptoms are not related to
eating or physical exercise.
• In the tilt-table test, the
blood pressure is initially
maintained until, after a
variable period, it falls
abruptly, often in association
with a drop in heart rate,
which can range from
asystole to only a few
milliseconds of slowing.
In contrast, in orthostatic
hypotension the fall in blood
pressure occurs immediately
upon head-up tilt, and is
usually progressive.
• The autonomic response
to the Valsalva maneuver
is normal; in contrast, in
autonomic failure there
is lack of blood pressure
overshoot after release of
the strain.
• Norepinephrine levels
increase appropriately on
standing, but fail to continue
increasing at the time of
syncope.
Vertigo • Vertigo is the result of
vestibular or cerebellar
pathology, but it may be
confused with the dizziness
or lightheadedness of
orthostatic hypotension.
• Neurologic exam
reveals cerebellar
ataxia or nystagmus.
Vestibular testing with
electronystagmography
shows abnormal responses.
Nonspecific falls in older
people
• Gait imbalance and falls are
common in older people and
may be the result of impaired
postural reflexes, reduced
visual acuity, or orthopedic
problems, and may be
confused with orthostatic
hypotension. Nonspecific
falls can be assessed by
physical exam, including a
full neurologic exam. When
questioned, patients with
basal ganglia dysfunction
may describe the sensation
of being inebriated when
standing due to impairment
in balance.
• Neurologic exam showing
gait imbalance or abnormal
postural reflexes.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Psychogenic syncope
(pseudo-syncope)
• Periods of unresponsiveness
due to psychiatric disorders
can easily be confused
with syncope. A psychiatric
evaluation is required to
determine the cause.
• A high attack frequency
and delayed recovery,
atypical triggers, and lack of
prodrome are more typical.
• Unresponsiveness during
a tilt-table test with a
documented lack of
hypotension or bradycardia
is very suggestive of
psychogenic syncope.
Unresponsiveness without
seizure activity or flattening
of the electroencephalogram
(EEG) during EEG
monitoring is virtually
diagnostic.
Criteria
Diagnostic criteria for orthostatic hypotension
A fall in systolic blood pressure of at least 20 mmHg (at least 30 mmHg in patients with hypertension) and/or
a fall in diastolic blood pressure of at least 10 mmHg within 3 minutes of standing.[1]
Orthostatic hypotension can be symptomatic or asymptomatic. It becomes clinically significant if it is
accompanied by symptoms of cerebral hypoperfusion, which can lead to syncope and falls.[3]
Screening
Older patients should be screened for orthostatic hypotension (OH) before they start medications that can
worsen or induce OH and syncope.
Patients with disorders known to affect the autonomic nervous system should have careful and frequent
evaluation of their blood pressure both supine and standing. Diagnosing OH is important because it can be
treated, and it is associated with numerous potential adverse outcomes if left untreated.
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Management
Approach
The goal of treatment is to improve symptoms and quality of life by increasing standing blood pressure
to a level that does not cause symptoms of cerebral hypoperfusion, and to prevent falls and morbidities
associated with orthostatic hypotension (OH). It is important to treat symptoms rather than blood pressure
levels.[29] [39] OH can be effectively treated with a combination of pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic
interventions.[42] [43] However, antihypotensive drugs frequently worsen supine hypertension, and most are
recommended based upon expert opinion with limited evidence supporting their use.[40]
Elimination of aggravating factors
Medications that induce or aggravate OH (e.g., alpha-blockers, central sympatholytics such as tizanidine
or methyldopa, tricyclic antidepressants, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, beta-blockers) should be
carefully reviewed and eliminated, if appropriate.[15] [18] [39] As "bladder-selective" alpha-blockers, such
as tamsulosin, can aggravate OH in older men, this in turn may increase the risk of hip fracture.[44] [45]
Orthostatic hypotension in hypertensive patients
Hypertension is a risk factor for OH, and both conditions commonly coexist in older patients. Although
certain antihypertensive agents can trigger or worsen OH, complete withdrawal of antihypertensives is
not appropriate as this will lead to pressure diuresis and worsening of OH. One meta-analysis found that
effective antihypertensive treatment is possible without worsening of OH.[46]
Three particular patterns of hypertension are most closely associated with OH: white coat effect,
nocturnal hypertension, or nondipping (absence of normal drop in blood pressure while asleep), and
morning hypotension (thought to be caused by the transient effect of pressure diuresis driven by supine
hypertension overnight).[15]
For hypertensive patients with coexisting OH, it is important to individualize the approach, and
first characterize the patterns, triggers and cause, as this will vary markedly between patients.
Nonpharmacologic approaches are always first-line, as is optimization of nonantihypertensive drugs.[15]
Judicious use of antihypertensives (e.g., ACE inhibitors, angiotensin-II receptor antagonists) and
avoiding agents likely to cause OH (e.g., alpha-blockers, central sympatholytics, beta-blockers) is
recommended.[15] [18]
Pharmacologic treatment of OH for hypertensive patients is challenging because we are, by turns, trying
to both lower and raise their blood pressure according to the relevant circumstance.
Lifestyle changes
Patients should first sit when going from a supine to a standing position. Straining during bowel
movements or performing Valsalva-like maneuvers during isometric exercise may significantly reduce
venous return to the heart and worsen OH, leading to syncope. Constipation should therefore be treated
aggressively. Eating frequent, small meals is often effective in lessening postprandial blood pressure falls.
Patients should be aware that hot environments lead to cutaneous vasodilation to dissipate heat and may
worsen OH.
Patients should liberalize their dietary salt intake or use sodium chloride tablets with each meal and drink
at least 2 liters of water a day.[29] Tilting the head of the bed up during the night, by inserting blocks
15-22 cm (6-9 inches) high under the headposts, reduces overnight sodium and water excretion by the
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Management
MANAGEMENT
kidney and lessens OH in the morning. Another effective strategy is to rapidly drink 500 mL (16 oz) of
tap water, as a fluid bolus, in 3-4 minutes. This can be used as a rescue measure for patients who are
symptomatic on standing, and takes effect within 5-10 minutes, peaking at 30 minutes. This is thought to
be a sympathetic reflex induced by the hypotonicity of the water rather than a volume effect.[15]
Physical measures
The use of physical counter-maneuvers when upright, such as leg-crossing, standing on tiptoes, and
muscle tensing, increases venous return to the heart and enhances orthostatic tolerance. Custom-made
full-length elastic stockings can be useful in preventing pooling in the lower extremities but can be difficult
to use. An abdominal binder may be as effective as a vasopressor, and can be tried first.[47] [48]
More research is needed to define the efficacy of nonpharmacologic interventions in the management of
OH.[49]
Short-acting pressor agents
Only two medications are approved for the treatment of OH: midodrine and droxidopa. Evidence for
the use of fludrocortisone is weak, as it increases supine more than standing blood pressure, and it
is contraindicated in the presence of heart failure - a common comorbidity in patients with OH.[15]
 Droxidopa and fludrocortisone are discussed separately below.
When nonpharmacologic measures are not sufficient to alleviate symptoms, short-acting pressor agents
are used. These agents are certainly first-line for patients with hypertension or heart failure, and are now
generally used first-line in all patients.[39] [50]
Vasoconstrictor agents such as the selective alpha-1-adrenoreceptor agonist midodrine increase blood
pressure and improve symptoms of OH.[39] Adverse effects of midodrine include pilomotor reactions,
pruritus, supine hypertension, and urinary retention.[51]
Pyridostigmine, an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, is used in the treatment of OH.[52] It has modest
pressor effects, and is often used in combination with midodrine. It is arguably, the safest drug to use
for OH in hypertensive patients as it is engaged only during the sympathetic activation that occurs while
upright to selectively increase upright blood pressure without worsening supine hypertension. However,
overall evidence is limited, and it may not be effective in severely affected patients.[15]
The norepinephrine-reuptake inhibitor atomoxetine can acutely improve upright blood pressure and
ameliorate symptoms in some patients, but long-term efficacy has not been demonstrated.[53] [54]
Pressor agents are best given on an as-required basis, within the prescribed daily frequencies, taken
30-45 minutes before upright activity or meals (according to the precipitating factor for an individual
patient), and their effect lasts for 2-3 hours.[39] They should be avoided before bed.
Droxidopa
Droxidopa is a prodrug that is converted to norepinephrine in the body (by the same enzyme that
converts levodopa to dopamine).[55] It is an alternative option to short-acting pressor agents. Droxidropa
increases blood pressure, with a peak effect about 3 hours after administration, and improves symptoms
associated with OH. Droxidopa has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the
treatment of neurogenic OH, based upon randomized controlled trials (RCTs) demonstrating symptom
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Management
improvement after 1 week of treatment.[56] [57] A post-marketing study to determine persistence of
effects is ongoing.[58] It may not be available in countries outside the US.
Mineralocorticoid therapy
In nonhypertensive patients in whom nonpharmacologic measures do not achieve the desired result,
consideration can be given to treatment with fludrocortisone (a synthetic mineralocorticoid).[39] When
combined with a high salt intake, fludrocortisone raises blood pressure.[59] Evidence for fludrocortisone
is, however, limited to RCTs (of people with diabetes or Parkinson disease) and observational studies.[60]
 Potassium supplementation may be needed, because fludrocortisone increases renal potassium
excretion. Fludrocortisone should be used with extreme caution as it results in hypertension when supine,
promotes cardiac fibrosis, and may accelerate progression of renal deterioration.[61] It is generally
contraindicated in patients with heart failure.
Treatment of coexisting conditions
Other agents that have been tested in specific conditions that coexist with OH are erythropoietin in
anemia, desmopressin in nocturnal polyuria, and octreotide in postprandial OH, but evidence supportive
of clinical benefit is weak.[50]
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute ( summary )
all patients
1st eliminate aggravating factors and institute
lifestyle changes
adjunct short-acting pressor or droxidopa
absence of hypertension
or heart failure
adjunct mineralocorticoid therapy
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute
all patients
1st eliminate aggravating factors and institute
lifestyle changes
» Medications that induce or aggravate
orthostatic hypotension (OH; e.g., alpha-
blockers, central sympatholytics such
as tizanidine or methyldopa, tricyclic
antidepressants, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors,
beta-blockers) should be carefully reviewed
and eliminated, if appropriate.[15] [18] [39] As
"bladder-selective" alpha-blockers, such as
tamsulosin, can aggravate OH in older men, this
in turn may increase the risk of hip fracture.[44]
[45]
» Hypertension is a risk factor for OH, and both
conditions commonly coexist in older patients.
Although certain antihypertensive agents can
trigger or worsen OH, complete withdrawal of
antihypertensives is not appropriate as this
will lead to pressure diuresis and worsening
of OH. One meta-analysis found that effective
antihypertensive treatment is possible
without worsening of OH.[46] Judicious use
of antihypertensives (e.g., ACE inhibitors,
angiotensin-II receptor antagonists) and avoiding
agents likely to cause OH (e.g., alpha-blockers,
central sympatholytics, beta-blockers) is
recommended. 
» Patients should first sit when going from
supine to standing. Straining during bowel
movements or performing Valsalva-like
maneuvers should be avoided. Eating frequent,
small meals is often effective in lessening
postprandial hypotension. Patients should be
aware that hot environments may worsen OH.
» Physical counter-maneuvers when upright,
such as leg-crossing, standing on tiptoes, and
muscle-tensing, enhance orthostatic tolerance.
Custom-made, full-length elastic stockings can
be useful in preventing pooling in the lower
extremeties, but can be difficult to use. An
abdominal binder may be as effective as a
vasopressor, and can be tried first.[47] [48]
» Patients should liberalize their dietary salt
intake or use sodium chloride tablets with each
meal and drink at least 2 liters of water a day.[29]
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Management
Acute
 Tilting the head of the bed up during the night,
by inserting blocks 15-22 cm (6-9 inches) high
under the headposts, reduces overnight sodium
and water excretion by the kidney and lessens
OH in the morning. Another effective strategy
is to rapidly drink 500 mL (16 oz) of tap water,
as a fluid bolus, in 3-4 minutes. This can be
used as a rescue measure for patients who
are symptomatic on standing, and takes effect
within 5-10 minutes, peaking at 30 minutes. This
is thought to be a sympathetic reflex induced
by the hypotonicity of the water rather than a
volume effect.[15]
adjunct short-acting pressor or droxidopa
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» midodrine: 10 mg orally three times daily
OR
» droxidopa: 100-600 mg orally three times
daily
Secondary options
» pyridostigmine: consult specialist for
guidance on dose
OR
» atomoxetine: consult specialist for guidance
on dose
» When nonpharmacologic measures are not
sufficient to alleviate symptoms, a short-acting
pressor or droxidopa can be used.[39] [52] [53]
[55] Only two medications are approved for
the treatment of orthostatic hypotension (OH):
midodrine and droxidopa.
» Vasoconstrictor agents, such as the selective
alpha-1-adrenoreceptor agonist midodrine,
increase blood pressure and improve symptoms
of OH.[39] Adverse effects of midodrine
include pilomotor reactions, pruritus, supine
hypertension, and urinary retention.[51]
» Droxidopa, a norepinephrine prodrug, is
converted to norepinephrine in the body by
the same enzyme that converts levodopa to
dopamine.[55] It increases blood pressure, with
a peak effect about 3 hours after administration,
and improves symptoms associated with
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
OH. It has been approved for the treatment
of neurogenic OH, based upon randomized
controlled trials demonstrating symptom
improvement after 1 week of treatment.[56] [57]
 A post-marketing study to determine persistence
of effects is ongoing.[58] Droxidopa should be
taken upon arising in the morning, at midday,
and late afternoon at least 3 hours prior to
bedtime to reduce the potential for supine
hypertension. However, many patients can
miss out the late afternoon dose. It may not be
available in countries outside the US.
» Pyridostigmine, an acetylcholinesterase
inhibitor, has modest pressor effects but can
help some patients with mild-to-moderate OH. It
is often used in combination with midodrine.[52]
» The norepinephrine-reuptake inhibitor
atomoxetine can acutely improve upright blood
pressure and ameliorate symptoms in some
patients, but long-term efficacy has not been
demonstrated.[53] [54]
» Pressor agents are best given on an as-
required basis, within the prescribed daily
frequencies, taken 30-45 minutes before upright
activity or meals (according to the precipitating
factor for an individual patient), and their effect
lasts for 2-3 hours.[39] They should be avoided
before bed.
absence of hypertension
or heart failure
adjunct mineralocorticoid therapy
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» fludrocortisone: 0.1 to 0.2 mg orally once
daily
» In nonhypertensive patients in whom
nonpharmacologic measures do not achieve
the desired result, consideration can be
given to treatment with fludrocortisone (a
synthetic mineralocorticoid).[39] It is generally
contraindicated in patients with heart failure - a
common comorbidity of patients with orthostatic
hypotension (OH).
» When combined with a high salt intake,
fludrocortisone raises blood pressure.[59]
 Evidence for fludrocortisone is, however,
limited to small randomized controlled trials (of
people with diabetes or Parkinson disease) and
observational studies.[60] Dietary salt can be
increased or sodium chloride tablets can be
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Management
Acute
taken. Water intake should be at least 2 liters
each day.[29]
» Potassium supplementation may be needed,
because fludrocortisone increases renal
potassium excretion. Fludrocortisone should
be used with extreme caution as it results in
hypertension when supine, promotes cardiac
fibrosis, and may accelerate progression of renal
deterioration.[61]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Management
MANAGEMENT
Emerging
Atomoxetine plus pyridostigmine
A combination of atomoxetine and pyridostigmine significantly increased seated blood pressure in a small,
single-blind crossover study of patients with neurogenic orthostatic hypotension, who were unresponsive to
either agent alone.[62] Further research is required.
Primary prevention
Medications that trigger orthostatic hypotension (OH) should be avoided in susceptible populations. Common
medications known to trigger OH are alpha-blockers (used for treating conditions such as benign prostatic
hypertrophy), central sympatholytics (e.g., tizanidine used as a muscle relaxant, and methyldopa to treat
hypertension), tricyclic antidepressants, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors (used to treat conditions such as
erectile dysfunction), and other antihypertensive agents, particularly beta-blockers.[15] [18] Levodopa and
dopaminergic agonists have been associated with OH, but evidence is not consistent.[24] [25] [26]
Dehydration and diets that are very low in sodium should also be avoided in susceptible populations.
Tight glycemic control has been shown to delay progression of autonomic neuropathy in type 1 diabetes, but
not in type 2 diabetes.
Secondary prevention
Patients with OH should be aware that their condition makes them more susceptible to syncope, thereby
rendering them more vulnerable to falls. Educating patients about the effects of posture, medications,
and hydration on blood pressure, and the need to use physical counter-maneuvers is important to prevent
falls.[39]
Patients should be told to avoid being supine during the day because of the increased incidence of supine
hypertension in patients with OH caused by chronic autonomic failure. Patients should be instructed to sleep
with the head of the bed elevated at 30° or as tolerated.
Patient discussions
Patients should be advised to:[64]  [Mayo clinic: orthostatic hypotension] (https://www.mayoclinic.org/
diseases-conditions/orthostatic-hypotension/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20352553)   [American Autonomic
Society] (https://thedysautonomiaproject.org/aas)
• sit when going from a supine to a standing position, to lessen orthostatic stress
• use a bedside commode, if needed (to avoid syncope at night among patients with frequent
nocturia)
• avoid performing Valsalva-like maneuvers during isometric exercise, and avoid straining (e.g.,
during a bowel movement), to avoid reducing venous return to the heart and worsening orthostatic
hypotension (OH)
• eat small, frequent meals, to lessen postprandial falls in blood pressure
• use physical counter-maneuvers when upright, such as leg-crossing, standing on tiptoes, and
muscle tensing, to increase venous return to the heart and enhance orthostatic tolerance
• stay well hydrated and avoid other aggravating factors that worsen OH.
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Follow up
Monitoring
Monitoring
Patients prescribed antihypotensive medication must be followed on a regular basis, typically every
3 to 6 months. At follow-up visits, measurements of supine and standing blood pressures should be
performed. In patients with supine hypertension, 24-hour ambulatory monitoring may be required to
assess the severity of hypertension and the need for treatment. Yearly measurements of creatinine should
be performed to monitor renal function and the potential development of renal failure.
The possibility of infection (most frequently urinary tract infection), dehydration, or the addition of a
medication should be excluded in patients with known OH who experience a sudden worsening of
symptoms.
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
falls short term high
Falls in older people are a significant cause of morbidity and mortality. If orthostatic hypotension (OH) is
severe enough to compromise blood supply to the brain, syncope and loss of postural tone can occur. In
patients with OH, the likelihood of syncope is markedly increased, especially when there is a combination
of aggravating factors (e.g., cutaneous vasodilation during hot weather, dehydration, prolonged standing).
The most important measure for preventing OH-induced falls is patient education (i.e., avoiding triggers
of OH, learning to recognize symptoms and to sit down immediately to avoid syncope, and using physical
counter-maneuvers aimed at increasing venous return during orthostatic stresses).
supine hypertension long term medium
In 50% of patients with severe autonomic impairment, circadian blood pressure rhythms are lost and blood
pressure is elevated at night. This causes end-organ damage.
Periodic measurements of left ventricular thickness and serum creatinine levels are necessary to monitor
the progression of end-organ damage in patients with supine hypertension.
Patients should not lie down during the day. Sleeping with the head of the bed elevated reduces supine
hypertension.
Short-acting antihypertensive drugs taken at bedtime may be required.
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Prognosis
The goal of treatment is to improve symptoms and quality of life, and to prevent falls and morbidities
associated with orthostatic hypotension (OH). It is important to treat symptoms rather than blood pressure
levels.[29] [39]
Neurodegenerative disorders with autonomic failure and a
movement disorder
OH in patients with neurodegenerative disorders that affect autonomic nerves and motor pathways (e.g.,
Parkinson disease, multiple system atrophy) can be successfully treated with significant improvement in
quality of life. However, the relentless progression of nonautonomic neurologic deficits is the main factor
affecting prognosis.
Pure autonomic failure
Pure autonomic failure is a neurodegenerative disorder that does not affect motor pathways. The prognosis
is usually benign if OH and other autonomic problems can be successfully treated. However, patients with
pure autonomic failure have a 10% per year cumulative risk of developing Parkinson disease, dementia with
Lewy bodies, or multiple system atrophy. This risk is increased in patients with REM sleep behavior
disorder.[2] [34]
Peripheral autonomic neuropathies
OH can be successfully treated in most autonomic neuropathies, but the prognosis depends on the
underlying disorder.
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Guidelines
Diagnostic guidelines
International
Guideline for the evaluation and management of patients with syncope
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499)   [38]
Published by: American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart
Rhythm Society
Last published: 2017
The recommendations of a consensus panel for the screening, diagnosis,
and treatment of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension and associated supine
hypertension (https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00415-016-8375-x)  
[28]
Published by: American Autonomic Society and the National Parkinson
Foundation
Last published: 2017
Evaluation and treatment of orthostatic hypotension (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3769179)   [39]
Published by: American Society of Hypertension Last published: 2013
Consensus statement on the definition of neurogenic supine hypertension
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29766366)   [40]
Published by: American Autonomic Society; European Federation of
Autonomic Societies; Endorsed by the European Academy of Neurology;
and the European Society of Hypertension (ESH).
Last published: 2018
Consensus statement on the definition of orthostatic hypotension,
neurally mediated syncope and the postural tachycardia syndrome (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21431947)   [1]
Published by: Consensus Committee of the American Autonomic
Society; European Federation of Autonomic Societies; World Federation
of Neurology; American Academy of Neurology
Last published: 2011
Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of syncope (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [41]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2018
EFNS guidelines on the diagnosis and management of orthostatic
hypotension (https://www.ean.org/Reference-Center.2699.0.html)   [29]
Published by: European Federation of Neurological Societies Last published: 2011
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Guidelines
GUIDELINES
Treatment guidelines
International
The recommendations of a consensus panel for the screening, diagnosis,
and treatment of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension and associated supine
hypertension (https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00415-016-8375-x)  
[28]
Published by: American Autonomic Society and the National Parkinson
Foundation
Last published: 2017
Guideline for the evaluation and management of patients with syncope
(https://www.acc.org/guidelines#doctype=Guidelines)   [38]
Published by: American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart
Rhythm Society
Last published: 2017
Evaluation and treatment of orthostatic hypotension (https://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jch.12062)   [39]
Published by: American Society of Hypertension Last published: 2013
Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of syncope (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [41]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2018
EFNS guidelines on the diagnosis and management of orthostatic
hypotension (https://www.ean.org/research/ean-guidelines/guideline-
reference-center)   [29]
Published by: European Federation of Neurological Societies Last published: 2011
Orthostatic hypotension due to autonomic dysfunction: midodrine (https://
www.nice.org.uk/advice/esnm61/chapter/Key-points-from-the-evidence)   [63]
Published by: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2015
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Online resources
Online resources
1. Mayo clinic: orthostatic hypotension (https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/orthostatic-
hypotension/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20352553)  (external link)
2. American Autonomic Society (https://thedysautonomiaproject.org/aas)  (external link)
ONLINE RESOURCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Orthostatic hypotension References
REFERENCES
Key articles
• Juraschek SP, Cortez MM, Flack JM, et al. Orthostatic hypotension in adults with hypertension: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2024 Mar;81(3):e16-30. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/HYP.0000000000000236)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38205630?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Gibbons CH, Schmidt P, Biaggioni I, et al. The recommendations of a consensus panel for the
screening, diagnosis, and treatment of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension and associated supine
hypertension. J Neurol. 2017 Aug;264(8):1567-82.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5533816)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28050656?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Lahrmann H, Cortelli P, Hilz M, et al. EFNS guidelines on orthostatic hypotension. In: Gilhus NE,
Barnes MP, Brainin M (eds). European Handbook of Neurological Management. Vol 1, 2nd ed. Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell; 2011.
• Shibao C, Lipsitz LA, Biaggioni I; American Society of Hypertension Writing Group. Evaluation and
treatment of orthostatic hypotension. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2013 Jul-Aug;7(4):317-24.  Full text
(https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jch.12062/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23721882?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, et al. Consensus statement on the definition of orthostatic
hypotension, neurally mediated syncope and the postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Auton Res. 2011
Apr;21(2):69-72. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21431947?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Norcliffe-Kaufmann L, Kaufmann H, Palma JA, et al. Orthostatic heart rate changes in patients
with autonomic failure caused by neurodegenerative synucleinopathies. Ann Neurol. 2018
Mar;83(3):522-31.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5867255)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29405350?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Mol A, Bui Hoang PTS, Sharmin S, et al. Orthostatic hypotension and falls in older adults: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2019 May;20(5):589-97.e5. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30583909?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Rawlings AM, Juraschek SP, Heiss G, et al. Association of orthostatic hypotension with incident
dementia, stroke, and cognitive decline. Neurology. 2018 Aug 21;91(8):e759-68.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6107267)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30045960?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Fagard RH, De Cort P. Orthostatic hypotension is a more robust predictor of cardiovascular
events than nighttime reverse dipping in elderly. Hypertension. 2010 Jul;56(1):56-61. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.110.151654?
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Orthostatic hypotension References
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20458003?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. Fedorowski A, Stavenow L, Hedblad B, et al. Orthostatic hypotension predicts all-cause mortality
and coronary events in middle-aged individuals (The Malmo Preventive Project). Eur Heart J. 2010
Jan;31(1):85-91.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2800919)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19696189?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. McDonagh STJ, Mejzner N, Clark CE. Prevalence of postural hypotension in primary, community and
institutional care: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Fam Pract. 2021 Jan 2;22(1):1.  Full
text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7777418)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33388038?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Saedon NI, Pin Tan M, Frith J. The prevalence of orthostatic hypotension: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2020 Jan 1;75(1):117-22.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6909901)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30169579?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Rutan GH, Hermanson B, Bild DE, et al. Orthostatic hypotension in older adults. The Cardiovascular
Health Study. CHS Collaborative Research Group. Hypertension. 1992 Jun;19(6 pt 1):508-19. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/epdf/10.1161/01.HYP.19.6.508)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1592445?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Rose KM, Tyroler HA, Nardo CJ, et al. Orthostatic hypotension and the incidence of coronary heart
disease: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study. Am J Hypertens. 2000 Jun;13(6 pt 1):571-8. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/ajh/article/13/6/571/186182?login=false)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10912737?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Benvenuto LJ, Krakoff LR. Morbidity and mortality of orthostatic hypotension: implications for
management of cardiovascular disease. Am J Hypertens. 2011 Feb;24(2):135-44.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/ajh/article/24/2/135/149597?login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20814408?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Hartog LC, Cizmar-Sweelssen M, Knipscheer A, et al. The association between orthostatic
hypotension, falling and successful rehabilitation in a nursing home population. Arch Gerontol
Geriatr. 2015 Sep-Oct;61(2):190-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26026216?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Hartog LC, Cimzar-Sweelssen M, Knipscheer A, et al. Orthostatic hypotension does not predict
recurrent falling in a nursing home population. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2017 Jan - Feb;68:39-43.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27616565?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Weiss A, Grossman E, Beloosesky Y, et al. Orthostatic hypotension in acute geriatric
ward: is it a consistent finding? Arch Intern Med. 2002 Nov 11;162(20):2369-74.  Full text
(https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/213832)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12418952?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Juraschek SP, Cortez MM, Flack JM, et al. Orthostatic hypotension in adults with hypertension: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 2024 Mar;81(3):e16-30. 
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Orthostatic hypotension References
REFERENCES
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/HYP.0000000000000236)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38205630?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Vagaonescu TD, Saadia D, Tuhrim S, et al. Hypertensive cardiovascular damage in patients
with primary autonomic failure. Lancet. 2000 Feb 26;355(9205):725-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10703810?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Palma JA, Redel-Traub G, Porciuncula A, et al. The impact of supine hypertension on target
organ damage and survival in patients with synucleinopathies and neurogenic orthostatic
hypotension. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2020 Jun;75:97-104. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/32516630?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Bhanu C, Nimmons D, Petersen I, et al. Drug-induced orthostatic hypotension: A systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. PLoS Med. 2021 Nov;18(11):e1003821.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8577726)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34752479?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Zhou Y, Ke SJ, Qiu XP, et al. Prevalence, risk factors, and prognosis of orthostatic hypotension
in diabetic patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2017
Sep;96(36):e8004.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6392609)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28885363?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Olshansky B, Muldowney J. Cardiovascular safety considerations in the treatment of neurogenic
orthostatic hypotension. Am J Cardiol. 2020 May 15;125(10):1582-93.  Full text (https://
www.ajconline.org/article/S0002-9149(20)30102-8/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/32204870?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Kaufmann H, Biaggioni I. Autonomic failure in neurodegenerative disorders. Semin
Neurol. 2003 Dec;23(4):351-63. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15088256?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Vernino S, Low PA, Fealey RD, et al. Autoantibodies to ganglionic acetylcholine receptors in
autoimmune autonomic neuropathies. N Engl J Med. 2000 Sep 21;343(12):847-55.  Full text
(http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM200009213431204#t=article)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10995864?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Dani M, Dirksen A, Taraborrelli P, et al. Orthostatic hypotension in older people: considerations,
diagnosis and management. Clin Med (Lond). 2021 May;21(3):e275-82.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8140709)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34001585?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Noack C, Schroeder C, Heusser K, et al. Cardiovascular effects of levodopa in Parkinson's
disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Aug;20(8):815-8.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC8140709)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24819390?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Nimmons D, Bhanu C, Orlu M, et al. Orthostatic hypotension and antiparkinsonian drugs: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2021 Dec 29;:8919887211060017.  Full text
(https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/08919887211060017?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Orthostatic hypotension References
%3Arid%3Acrossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub++0pubmed)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34964392?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Jost WH, Altmann C, Fiesel T, et al. Influence of levodopa on orthostatic hypotension in Parkinson's
Disease. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2020;54(2):200-3.  Full text (https://journals.viamedica.pl/
neurologia_neurochirurgia_polska/article/view/PJNNS.a2020.0019/50526)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32219811?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Shaw BH, Garland EM, Black BK, et al. Optimal diagnostic thresholds for diagnosis of orthostatic
hypotension with a 'sit-to-stand test'. J Hypertens. 2017 May;35(5):1019-25.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5542884)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28129252?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Gibbons CH, Schmidt P, Biaggioni I, et al. The recommendations of a consensus panel for the
screening, diagnosis, and treatment of neurogenic orthostatic hypotension and associated supine
hypertension. J Neurol. 2017 Aug;264(8):1567-82.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5533816)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28050656?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Lahrmann H, Cortelli P, Hilz M, et al. EFNS guidelines on orthostatic hypotension. In: Gilhus NE,
Barnes MP, Brainin M (eds). European Handbook of Neurological Management. Vol 1, 2nd ed. Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell; 2011.
30. Gilani A, Juraschek SP, Belanger MJ, et al. Postural hypotension. BMJ. 2021 Apr 23;373:n922.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33893162?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Cremer A, Rousseau AL, Boulestreau R, et al. Screening for orthostatic hypotension using home blood
pressure measurements. J Hypertens. 2019 May;37(5):923-27. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30418320?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Norcliffe-Kaufmann L, Kaufmann H. Is ambulatory blood pressure monitoring useful in patients
with chronic autonomic failure? Clin Auton Res. 2014 Aug;24(4):189-92. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24710680?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Kaufmann H, Norcliffe-Kaufmann L, Palma JA, et al. Natural history of pure autonomic failure: a United
States prospective cohort. Ann Neurol. 2017 Feb;81(2):287-97. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28093795?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Millar Vernetti P, Norcliffe-Kaufmann L, Palma JA, et al. Phenoconversion in pure autonomic failure:
a multicentre prospective longitudinal cohort study. Brain. 2024 Jul 5;147(7):2440-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38366572?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Thijs RD, Brignole M, Falup-Pecurariu C, et al. Recommendations for tilt table testing and
other provocative cardiovascular autonomic tests in conditions that may cause transient loss of
consciousness : Consensus statement of the European Federation of Autonomic Societies (EFAS)
endorsed by the American Autonomic Society (AAS) and the European Academy of Neurology
(EAN). Auton Neurosci. 2021 Jul;233:102792.  Full text (https://www.autonomicneuroscience.com/
article/S1566-0702(21)00022-9/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33752997?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Orthostatic hypotension References
REFERENCES
36. Cheshire WP, Freeman R, Gibbons CH, et al. Electrodiagnostic assessment of the autonomic nervous
system: A consensus statement endorsed by the American Autonomic Society, American Academy
of Neurology, and the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Clin Neurophysiol. 2021
Feb;132(2):666-82.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S138824572030585X?
via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33419664?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Mathias CJ. Autonomic diseases: clinical features and laboratory evaluation. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry. 2003 Sep;74 Suppl 3:iii31-41.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1765633/pdf/v074piii31.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12933912?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Shen WK, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline for the evaluation and
management of patients with syncope: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society.
Circulation. 2017 Aug 1;136(5):e60-e122.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000499?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub
%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28280231?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Shibao C, Lipsitz LA, Biaggioni I; American Society of Hypertension Writing Group. Evaluation and
treatment of orthostatic hypotension. J Am Soc Hypertens. 2013 Jul-Aug;7(4):317-24.  Full text
(https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jch.12062/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23721882?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Fanciulli A, Jordan J, Biaggioni I, et al. Consensus statement on the definition of neurogenic supine
hypertension in cardiovascular autonomic failure by the American Autonomic Society (AAS) and
the European Federation of Autonomic Societies (EFAS) : Endorsed by the European Academy
of Neurology (EAN) and the European Society of Hypertension (ESH). Clin Auton Res. 2018
Aug;28(4):355-62.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6097730)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29766366?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Brignole M, Moya A, de Lange FJ, et al. 2018 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
syncope. Eur Heart J. 2018 Jun 1;39(21):1883-948.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/
article/39/21/1883/4939241?login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29562304?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Wahba A, Shibao CA, Muldowney JAS, et al. Management of orthostatic hypotension in the
hospitalized patient: a narrative review. Am J Med. 2022 Jan;135(1):24-31.  Full text (https://
www.amjmed.com/article/S0002-9343(21)00515-5/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34416163?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Park JW, Okamoto LE, Shibao CA, et al. Pharmacologic treatment of orthostatic hypotension. Auton
Neurosci. 2020 Dec;229:102721.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7704612)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32979782?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Bird ST, Delaney JA, Brophy JM, et al. Tamsulosin treatment for benign prostatic hyperplasia and
risk of severe hypotension in men aged 40-85 years in the United States: risk window analyses
using between and within patient methodology. BMJ. 2013 Nov 5;347:f6320.  Full text (http://
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Orthostatic hypotension References
www.bmj.com/content/347/bmj.f6320.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24192967?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Seo GH, Lee YK, Ha YC. Risk of hip fractures in men with alpha-blockers: a nationwide study
base on claim registry. J Bone Metab. 2015 Feb;22(1):29-32.  Full text (http://e-jbm.org/DOIx.php?
id=10.11005/jbm.2015.22.1.29)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25774362?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Juraschek SP, Hu JR, Cluett JL, et al. Effects of intensive blood pressure treatment on orthostatic
hypotension: a systematic review and individual participant-based meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med.
2021 Jan;174(1):58-68.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7855528)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32909814?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Fanciulli A, Goebel G, Metzler B, et al. Elastic abdominal binders attenuate orthostatic hypotension
in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord Clin Pract. 2015 Nov 27;3(2):156-60.  Full text (http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mdc3.12270/full)
48. Okamoto LE, Diedrich A, Baudenbacher FJ, et al. Efficacy of servo-controlled splanchnic venous
compression in the treatment of orthostatic hypotension: a randomized comparison with midodrine.
Hypertension. 2016 Aug;68(2):418-26.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4945429)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27271310?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Logan A, Freeman J, Pooler J, et al. Effectiveness of non-pharmacological interventions to treat
orthostatic hypotension in elderly people and people with a neurological condition: a systematic
review. JBI Evid Synth. 2020 Dec;18(12):2556-2617.  Full text (https://journals.lww.com/jbisrir/
Fulltext/2020/12000/Effectiveness_of_non_pharmacological_interventions.4.aspx)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32773495?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Magkas N, Tsioufis C, Thomopoulos C, et al. Orthostatic hypotension: from pathophysiology to clinical
applications and therapeutic considerations. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2019 May;21(5):546-54. 
Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jch.13521)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30900378?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Chen JJ, Han Y, Tang J, et al. Standing and supine blood pressure outcomes associated with
droxidopa and midodrine in patients with neurogenic orthostatic hypotension: a Bayesian
meta-analysis and mixed treatment comparison of randomized trials. Ann Pharmacother.
2018 Dec;52(12):1182-94. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29972032?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Gales BJ, Gales MA. Pyridostigmine in the treatment of orthostatic intolerance. Ann
Pharmacother. 2007 Feb;41(2):314-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17284509?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Shibao C, Raj SR, Gamboa A, et al. Norepinephrine transporter blockade with atomoxetine induces
hypertension in patients with impaired autonomic function. Hypertension. 2007 Jul;50(1):47-53. 
Full text (http://hyper.ahajournals.org/content/50/1/47.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17515448?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Orthostatic hypotension References
REFERENCES
54. Ramirez CE, Okamoto LE, Arnold AC, et al. Efficacy of atomoxetine versus midodrine for the treatment
of orthostatic hypotension in autonomic failure. Hypertension. 2014 Dec;64(6):1235-40. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25185131?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Kaufmann H, Saadia D, Voustianiouk A, et al. Norepinephrine precursor therapy in
neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. Circulation. 2003 Aug 12;108(6):724-8.  Full text (http://
circ.ahajournals.org/content/108/6/724.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12885750?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Kaufmann H, Freeman R, Biaggioni I, et al; NOH301 Investigators. Droxidopa for neurogenic
orthostatic hypotension: a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Neurology. 2014 Jul
22;83(4):328-35.  Full text (http://www.neurology.org/content/83/4/328.long)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24944260?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Hauser RA, Isaacson S, Lisk JP, et al. Droxidopa for the short-term treatment of symptomatic
neurogenic orthostatic hypotension in Parkinson's disease (nOH306B). Mov Disord. 2015 Apr
15;30(5):646-54.  Full text (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.26086/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25487613?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov. Sustained effect of droxidopa in symptomatic
neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (RESTORE). Dec 2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02586623)
59. Hickler RB, Thompson GR, Fox LM, et al. Successful treatment of orthostatic hypotension
with 9-alpha-fluorohydrocortisone. N Engl J Med. 1959 Oct 15;261:788-91. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14401690?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Veazie S, Peterson K, Ansari Y, et al. Fludrocortisone for orthostatic hypotension. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2021 May 17;(5):CD012868.  Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/
cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD012868.pub2/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34000076?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Young MJ, Rickard AJ. Mineralocorticoid receptors in the heart: lessons from cell-selective
transgenic animals. J Endocrinol. 2015 Jan;224(1):R1-13.  Full text (http://joe.endocrinology-
journals.org/content/224/1/R1.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25335936?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Okamoto LE, Shibao CA, Gamboa A, et al. Synergistic pressor effect of atomoxetine and
pyridostigmine in patients with neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. Hypertension. 2019
Jan;73(1):235-41.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6309809)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30571543?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Orthostatic hypotension due to autonomic
dysfunction: midodrine. NICE advice [ESNM61]. October 2015 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
www.nice.org.uk/advice/esnm61/chapter/Key-points-from-the-evidence)
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Orthostatic hypotension References
64. Figueroa JJ, Basford JR, Low PA. Preventing and treating orthostatic hypotension: As easy as A, B,
C. Cleve Clin J Med. 2010 May;77(5):298-306.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC2888469)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20439562?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Orthostatic hypotension Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 13, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Italo Biaggioni, MD
Professor of Medicine and Pharmacology
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
DISCLOSURES: IB is a consultant for Theravance Biopharma, Amneal Pharmaceuticals, Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, and Neurawell Therapeutics for development of therapies for
orthostatic hypotension and postural tachycardia syndrome. He is also a patent holder for an automated
abdominal binder for the treatment of orthostatic hypotension and has submitted a patent application for the
use of guanfacine for the treatment of postural tachycardia and chronic fatigue syndromes.
Lucy Norcliffe-Kaufmann, PhD
Assistant Professor
Dysautonomia Center, Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, NYU Langone Medical Center, New
York, NY
DISCLOSURES: LNK is a board member of the American Autonomic Society and has received grant
support from Theravance Biopharma, PTC Therapeutics, National Institutes of Health, Michael J. Fox
Foundation, and the Familial Dysautonomia Foundation. LNK is an author of a number of references cited in
this topic.
Horacio Kaufmann, MD
Professor of Neurology
Medicine and Pediatrics, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
DISCLOSURES: HK is editor in chief of Clinical Autonomic Research and serves as principal investigator of
a clinical trial sponsored by Biogen MA Inc. HK has received consultancy fees from Lilly USA LLC, Biohaven
Pharmaceuticals Inc, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Ltd, Ono Pharma UK Ltd, Lundbeck LLC, and
Theravance Biopharma US Inc. HK is an author of a number of references cited in this topic.
// Peer Reviewers:
Phillip A. Low, MD
Robert D. and Patricia E. Kern Professor of Neurology
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN
DISCLOSURES: PAL is an author of a reference cited in this topic.
William P. Cheshire, MD
Professor of Neurology
Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL
DISCLOSURES: WPC declares that he has no competing interests.
Alan Moore, MB, FRCPI
Consultant Geriatrician
Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland
DISCLOSURES: AM has received payment from Shire Pharmaceuticals, manufacturer of midodrine, for
providing educational talks, and the department in which he works has received unrestricted educational
grants from Shire Pharmaceuticals.
