# Rheumatic fever

=== Page 1 ===
Rheumatic fever
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Apr 10, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Etiology  4
Pathophysiology  5
Classification  6
Case history  6
Diagnosis  8
Approach  8
History and exam  14
Risk factors  18
Tests  20
Differentials  24
Criteria  27
Screening  29
Management  30
Approach  30
Treatment algorithm overview  33
Treatment algorithm  35
Primary prevention  45
Secondary prevention  45
Patient discussions  46
Follow up  48
Monitoring  48
Complications  48
Prognosis  48
Guidelines  50
Diagnostic guidelines  50
Treatment guidelines  51
Online resources  52
References  53
Images  66
Disclaimer  71
=== Page 3 ===
Rheumatic fever Overview
Summary
Acute rheumatic fever (ARF) continues to cause a large burden of mortality and morbidity in low- and middle-
income countries. It is less common in high-income countries, but continues to be seen in indigenous
communities and during outbreaks.
Currently, no single test can diagnose ARF. Diagnosis is clinical and relies on the Jones criteria.
The 5 major manifestations of ARF are carditis, arthritis, chorea, erythema marginatum, and subcutaneous
nodules, of which the most common are carditis and arthritis.
The Jones criteria were revised in 2015 to include separate criteria for low-risk and moderate- to high-risk
populations and introduce the use of Doppler echocardiography to diagnose subclinical carditis.
While all other manifestations of ARF resolve without sequelae, carditis can lead to chronic rheumatic heart
disease (RHD).
Secondary prophylaxis is thought to ameliorate the progression of ARF to chronic RHD, but even the mildest
forms of carditis can result in chronic RHD and decreased survival.
The prognosis of established rheumatic valvular disease remains guarded, especially with severe disease.
Definition
Acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is an autoimmune disease that mostly occurs following group A streptococcal
throat infection, although there is growing evidence of ARF following skin infection in certain regions of the
world. It can affect multiple systems, including the joints, heart, brain, and skin. Only the effects on the heart
can lead to permanent illness; chronic changes to the heart valves are referred to as chronic rheumatic heart
disease (RHD). Without long-term penicillin secondary prophylaxis, ARF can recur, leading to cumulative
damage to the cardiac valvular tissue.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Rheumatic fever Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
Primary episodes of acute rheumatic fever (ARF) occur mainly in children aged 5 to 14 years and are rare in
people over 30 years old.[4] Recurrent episodes remain relatively common in adolescents and young adults
but uncommon in those over 35 years old.[1] Overall, it is estimated that in 2019, 40.5 million people were
affected by rheumatic heart disease (RHD), accounting for 10.7 million disability-adjusted life years lost and
leading to 306,000 deaths.[5] [6]
Global prevalence and mortality rates. Source: data derived from Global Burden of Disease data 2010/2013.
Zühlke, L.J., Beaton, A., Engel, M.E. et al. Group A streptococcus, acute
rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease: epidemiology and clinical
considerations. Curr Treat Options Cardio Med 19, 15 (2017). Used with permission.
The greatest burden of ARF and RHD is in people in low- and middle-income countries and in populations
of indigenous people living in poverty in high-income countries.[4] The highest prevalence and age-
standardized mortality of RHD are in Oceania, South Asia, and central sub-Saharan Africa.[5] [6] There is no
clear sex predilection for ARF, although RHD tends to be more common in females. ARF is most common in
tropical countries with no seasonal variation. The highest rates of ARF have been documented in Aboriginal
children in the Northern Territory of Australia and Pacific peoples, including those living in the US and New
Zealand.[7] [8] However, data from Uganda describe a higher incidence of ARF in populations with co-
existing malaria, suggesting under-recognition of ARF and the value of surveillance.[9]
ARF was common in high-income countries including the US until the first half of the 20th century, when
the incidence decreased because of improvements in living conditions and hygiene, which in turn led to
decreased transmission of group A streptococci.[10] In the 1980s there was a resurgence of ARF in the
intermountain regions of the US, thought to be related to the emergence of virulent group A streptococci
belonging to M serotypes 1, 3, and 18.[11] [12] [13] In addition, changing patterns of antibiotic use, in
particular the movement away from using antibiotics for treating group A streptococcal pharyngitis in
countries with low rates of ARF, may also have affected the epidemiology of group A streptococcal diseases.
However, overall the incidence of ARF in the US is unknown, as it is no longer a nationally notifiable
disease.[14]
Etiology
Acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is an autoimmune disease. It is the result of group A streptococcal infection
triggering an autoimmune response in a susceptible host.
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Rheumatic fever Theory
It is estimated that between 3% and 6% of any population may be susceptible to ARF and this proportion
appears to be fairly consistent across different population groups around the world.[1] [15] Familial clustering
has been reported and twin studies indicate high heritability.[16] [17]
Expression of D8/17 antigen has been observed to be associated with ARF in a number of populations,
including Australia, Israel, Russia, Mexico, and Chile.[18] [19] [20] However, this association is not universal
and no such association has been found in the US.[21]
Particular ethnic groups appear to be at higher risk of ARF than others. This is particularly evident in high-
income countries, where indigenous populations experience dramatically higher rates of ARF compared with
their non-indigenous counterparts, including Maori children in New Zealand, Aboriginal children in Australia,
and Polynesian children in Hawaii.[22] [23] [24] [25] However, it remains unclear whether these associations
are related to environmental factors or an underlying inherited susceptibility.
Genome-wide association studies have identified genetic determinants of susceptibility to rheumatic heart
disease, with novel loci identified in studies in Africa, Australia, and Oceania.[26] [27] [28] Studies are
ongoing that may further identify target genes or interventions.
Pathophysiology
Although it is clear that acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is an autoimmune disease, the exact nature of the
pathogenesis of ARF is still uncertain.
It has previously been considered that ARF follows group A streptococcal pharyngitis but not pyoderma,
although this has long been questioned.[29] Studies now show that group A streptococcus-positive throat or
skin swab is strongly associated with subsequent ARF, suggesting that group A streptococcal skin infection
can also trigger ARF.[30]
The interaction between group A streptococci and a susceptible host leads to an autoimmune response
directed against cardiac, synovial, subcutaneous, epidermal, and neuronal tissues.
It is believed that both cross-reactive antibodies and cross-reactive T cells play a role in the disease.
Molecular mimicry between group A  Streptococcus pyogenes  antigens and human host tissue is thought
to be the basis of this cross-reactivity.[31] [32] Putative cross-reactive epitopes on  S pyogenes  include the
M-protein and N-acetyl glucosamine. Monoclonal antibodies against these antigens cross-react with cardiac
myosin and other alpha-helical cardiac proteins such as laminin, tropomyosin, keratin, and vimentin, as well
as proteins in other target organs and tissues such as synovium, neuronal tissue, subcutaneous, and dermal
tissues.
It has been proposed that the carditis of ARF is initiated by cross-reactive antibodies that recognize the
valve endothelium and laminin.[33] Vascular cell adhesion-molecule-1 is up-regulated at the valve and
aids in recruitment and infiltration of these T cells. The T cells initiate a predominantly TH1 response with
the release of beta-interferon. Inflammation leads to neovascularization, which allows further recruitment
of T cells. It is believed that epitope spreading may occur in the valve whereby T cells respond against
other cardiac tissues such as vimentin and tropomyosin, leading to granulomatous inflammation and the
establishment of chronic rheumatic heart disease. Th17 cells (unique T helper cells) also appear to play an
important role in the pathogenesis of ARF.[34]
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Rheumatic fever Theory
THEORY
Rheumatic inflammation in the heart may affect the pericardium (often asymptomatic), the myocardium
(rarely contributes to cardiac failure), or the endocardium and valvular tissue (the most commonly
affected). Rheumatic granulomatous inflammation manifests in the myocardium as Aschoff bodies.[35]
These may disrupt cardiac electrical conduction pathways leading to prolongation of the PR interval on
electrocardiogram, and occasionally more advanced arrhythmias.
Classification
World Health Organization Expert Consultation: rheumatic fever
and rheumatic heart disease, 2004[1]
This commonly used schema classifies rheumatic fever into categories based on whether it is the first
episode (primary), whether the patient has had an episode of rheumatic fever previously (recurrent), or
whether the patient has established rheumatic heart disease (chronic rheumatic heart disease [RHD]).
• Primary episode of acute rheumatic fever (ARF): a patient without a prior episode of rheumatic fever
and without evidence of established RHD presents with a clinical illness that meets the requirements
of the Jones criteria for diagnosis of ARF.
• Recurrent episode of ARF: a patient who has had documented rheumatic fever in the past, but without
evidence of established RHD, who presents with a new clinical illness that meets the requirements of
the Jones criteria for diagnosis of ARF.
• Recurrent episode of ARF in patients with RHD: a patient who has evidence of established RHD, who
presents with a new clinical illness that meets the requirements of the Jones criteria for diagnosis of
ARF.
Note that the 2015 Jones criteria differ for low-risk and moderate- to high-risk populations. The criteria also
allow for diagnosis of possible ARF (i.e., patients, generally in high-incidence settings, in whom the clinician
is highly suspicious of the diagnosis of ARF, but who do not quite meet the Jones criteria, perhaps because
full testing facilities are not available).[2] See Criteria .
Case history
Case history #1
A 10-year-old Samoan girl presents with a 2-day history of fever and sore joints. Further questioning
reveals that she had a sore throat 3 weeks ago but did not seek medical help at this time. Her current
illness began with fever and a sore and swollen right knee that was very painful. The following day her
knee improved but her left elbow became sore and swollen. While in the waiting room her left knee is now
also becoming sore and swollen.
Other presentations
Patients, often females, may present with isolated chorea, following a latent period of up to 6 months
after the initial group A streptococcal infection. The history may be of a child who becomes fidgety at
school, followed by apparent clumsiness along with uncoordinated and erratic movements, often with
an associated history of emotional lability and other personality changes. Choreiform movements can
affect the whole body, or just one side of the body (hemi-chorea). The head is often involved, with erratic
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Rheumatic fever Theory
movements of the face that resemble grimaces, grins, and frowns. The tongue, if affected, can resemble a
"bag of worms" when protruded. In severe cases chorea may impair the ability to eat, write legibly, or walk
unaided, leading to injury. Chorea disappears with sleep and is made more pronounced by purposeful
movements. Recurrence of rheumatic chorea is common, often associated with intercurrent illness,
stress, pregnancy, or oral contraception. Rheumatic heart disease is commonly associated with chorea.
Mild cases may present with a murmur detected on medical examination; more severe cases may present
in cardiac failure. Neuropsychiatric symptoms have also been associated with chorea.[3]
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Approach
Acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is a clinical diagnosis and there is no single diagnostic test for the disease.
While the most common presentation is fever and arthritis, careful consideration of all of the manifestations
of ARF is required, along with consideration of alternative diagnoses for each manifestation.
Diagnostic criteria for rheumatic fever have evolved since the publication of the original Jones criteria
in 1944.[57] In the modern era, diagnostic criteria have evolved to be more sensitive in high-incidence
rheumatic fever populations, and to acknowledge the role of echocardiography and a broader spectrum of
joint manifestations.
A useful guide to diagnosis can be found within the 2015 update of the Jones criteria, which outlines a
diagnostic approach from 4 presenting symptoms/signs: chorea, arthritis, clinical carditis, and subcutaneous
nodules/erythema marginatum.[2]
Similarly useful algorithmic approaches are contained within guidelines published in Australia and New
Zealand.  [Australian guideline for prevention, diagnosis and management of acute rheumatic fever and
rheumatic heart disease] (https://www.rhdaustralia.org.au/arf-rhd-guideline)   [Heart Foundation of New
Zealand: diagnosis, management and secondary prevention of acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart
disease] (https://www.heartfoundation.org.nz/resources/acute-rheumatic-fever-and-rheumatic-heart-disease-
guideline)
Diagnosis of a primary episode: Jones criteria
The diagnosis of ARF is made on the basis of identification of major and minor clinical manifestations of
the disease as detailed by the Jones criteria. The latest revision of the Jones criteria, published in 2015,
provides 2 separate sets of criteria: one for low-risk settings (i.e., those with a rheumatic fever incidence
≤2 in 100,000 school-aged children or all-age rheumatic heart disease [RHD] prevalence ≤1 in 1000
population per year) and one for moderate- to high-risk populations.[2]
The diagnosis of a primary episode of ARF can be made if any of the following criteria are met.
• Evidence of a recent group A streptococcal infection with at least 2 major manifestations or 1 major
plus 2 minor manifestations present.
• Rheumatic chorea: can be diagnosed without the presence of other features (which is described
as "lone chorea") and without evidence of preceding streptococcal infection. It can occur up to 6
months after the initial infection.
• Chronic RHD: established mitral valve disease or mixed mitral/aortic valve disease, presenting for
the first time (in the absence of any symptoms suggestive of ARF).
The 2015 criteria also allow for the diagnosis of possible rheumatic fever. This category of diagnosis
allows for the situation when a given clinical presentation may not fulfil the revised Jones criteria but the
clinician may still have good reason to suspect the diagnosis.
Major and minor manifestations
Five manifestations are considered major manifestations of ARF:[2]
• Carditis: includes carditis demonstrated only by echocardiogram (i.e., subclinical carditis).
• Arthritis: polyarthritis (low-risk populations) or monoarthritis or polyarthritis or polyarthralgia
(moderate- to high-risk populations).
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
• Chorea.
• Erythema marginatum: pink serpiginous rash with a well-defined edge. It begins as a macule and
expands with central clearing. The rash may appear and then disappear before the examiner's
eyes, leading to the descriptive term of patients having "smoke rings" beneath the skin.
• Subcutaneous nodules.
Four manifestations are considered minor manifestations of ARF:[2]
• Fever: ≥101.3°F (≥38.5°C; low-risk populations) or ≥100.4°F (≥38.0°C; moderate- to high-risk
populations).
• Arthralgia: polyarthralgia (low-risk populations) or monoarthralgia (moderate- to high-risk
populations).
• Elevated inflammatory markers: erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) ≥60 mm/hour and/or C-
reactive protein (CRP) ≥3.0 mg/dL (low-risk populations) or ESR ≥30 mm/hour and/or CRP ≥3.0
mg/dL (moderate- to high-risk populations).
• Prolonged PR interval on electrocardiogram after accounting for age variability: a prolonged
PR interval that resolves over 2 to 3 weeks may be a useful diagnostic feature in cases when
clinical features are not definitive. First-degree heart block sometimes leads to a junctional rhythm.
Second-degree and even complete block are less common but can occur. In a resurgence of ARF
in the US, 32% of patients had abnormal atrioventricular conduction.
It is important to note that, in a patient in whom arthritis is considered a major manifestation, arthralgia
cannot be counted as a minor manifestation. In a patient in whom carditis is considered as a major
manifestation, a prolonged PR interval cannot be counted as a minor manifestation. See Criteria .
Carditis: clinical presentation
Rheumatic carditis refers to the active inflammation of the myocardium, endocardium, and pericardium
that occurs in rheumatic fever. While myocarditis and pericarditis may occur in rheumatic fever, the
predominant manifestation of carditis is involvement of the endocardium presenting as a valvulitis,
especially of the mitral and aortic valves. Carditis is diagnosed by the presence of a significant murmur, or
the development of cardiac enlargement with unexplained cardiac failure, or the presence of a pericardial
rub. In addition, evidence of valvulitis on echocardiogram (using published criteria) is now considered a
manifestation of carditis.[2] [58]
Mitral regurgitation is the most common clinical manifestation of carditis and can be heard as a
pansystolic murmur loudest at the apex. Cardiac failure occurs in <10% of primary episodes of rheumatic
fever.[59] [60] Shortness of breath may be related to cardiac failure. Pericarditis is uncommon in ARF,
and when it occurs, is usually accompanied by significant valvulitis. Pericarditis should be suspected in
patients with chest pain, diminished pulses, a pericardial rub on auscultation, or an enlarged heart on
chest x-ray. Individuals with rheumatic carditis may experience palpitations in association with advanced
heart block.
Echocardiographic evidence in the absence of clinical findings of carditis (i.e., subclinical carditis) is now
considered sufficient as a major manifestation of ARF. There are specific Doppler and morphological
findings on echocardiography that must be met.[2]
Recurrent carditis can be difficult to diagnose but is more likely if the first episode of rheumatic fever
included carditis and the patient has not been receiving continuous penicillin secondary prophylaxis. It
may be suspected by a new murmur, new signs of congestive heart failure, radiographic evidence of
cardiac enlargement, or worsening echocardiographic changes.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Joint involvement: clinical presentation
Joint involvement occurs in upward of 75% of cases of primary rheumatic fever, and may be a major
manifestation or a minor manifestation.[60] [61] The classic history of joint involvement in ARF is
one of large joint migratory polyarthritis, which may be either migratory or additive. If the patient has
monoarthritis and is suspected to have ARF, but does not meet the criteria for diagnosis, the patient
should withhold from nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) treatment so that the appearance of
migratory polyarthritis (a major manifestation) is not masked. The arthritis of ARF is very sensitive to
salicylates such as aspirin (as well as other NSAIDs), and joint symptoms typically respond within several
days of treatment with these anti-inflammatory drugs in ARF.
Chorea: clinical presentation
In 5% to 10% of patients, chorea features as part of the acute presentation.[60] [62] It may also occur
as an isolated finding up to 6 months after the initial group A streptococcal infection. It is also known as
Sydenham chorea (named after the physician who described St. Vitus Dance in the 17th century).
The history may be of a child who becomes fidgety at school, followed by apparent clumsiness along
with uncoordinated and erratic movements, often with an associated history of emotional lability and
other personality changes. Choreiform movements can affect the whole body, or just one side of the body
(hemichorea). The head is often involved with erratic movements of the face that resemble grimaces,
grins, and frowns; and the tongue, if affected, can resemble a "bag of worms" when protruded, and
protrusion cannot be maintained. In severe cases of chorea, this may impair the ability to eat, write, or
walk, placing the person at risk of injury. Chorea disappears with sleep and is made more pronounced
by purposeful movements. Typically, when asked to grip the physician's hand, the patient will be unable
to maintain grip and rhythmical squeezing results. This is known as the milkmaid's sign. Other signs of
chorea include spooning (flexion at the wrist with finger extension when the hand is extended) and the
pronator sign (when the palms turn outwards when held above the head). Recurrence and fluctuations
of rheumatic chorea are not uncommon, often associated with pregnancy, intercurrent illness, or the oral
contraceptive pill.
Investigations
The diagnosis of rheumatic fever requires a series of investigations. The minimum set of investigations
required for suspected ARF is:[63]
• ESR, CRP, and white blood cell count: Australian data found that CRP and ESR were commonly
elevated in patients with confirmed ARF (excluding chorea), whereas the leukocyte count usually
was not elevated.[64] Therefore the authors do not recommend including white cell count in the
diagnosis of rheumatic fever.
• Blood cultures if febrile: helps to exclude other infectious causes, particularly bone and joint
infection and infective endocarditis.
• Electrocardiogram: to look for lengthening of the PR interval.
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
ECG showing heart block in acute rheumatic fever
Aust N Z J Med. 1996 Apr;26(2):241-2; used with permission
• Chest x-ray if clinical or echocardiographic evidence of carditis.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Chest x-ray of biventricular heart failure due to acute carditis in rheumatic fever
Lancet. 2006 Jun 24;367(9528):2118; used with permission
• Echocardiogram: to look for evidence of acute carditis and/or RHD. The role of echocardiography
in the diagnosis of ARF was once controversial;[65] [66] however, it is now accepted that
echocardiography is more sensitive and specific than cardiac auscultation for the identification
of rheumatic valvular disease.[67] [68] It is recommended that all patients with suspected ARF,
with or without clinical evidence of carditis, should have an echocardiogram. If initially negative,
it may be repeated after 2-4 weeks as carditis can evolve over several weeks and its presence or
absence may have major implications for diagnosis and ongoing management. There are published
morphological and Doppler findings that are typical of rheumatic fever (see below).[2] In addition,
echocardiography is useful in grading severity of rheumatic carditis and differentiating congenital
from acquired valvular pathology, and can be used to investigate suspected valve damage.
• Throat culture: culture for group A  Streptococcus  (preferably prior to starting antibiotic therapy).
Less than 10% of throat cultures are positive for group A streptococci, reflecting the post-infectious
nature of the disease.[69] Group A streptococci have usually been eradicated before onset of the
disease.
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
• Anti-streptococcal serology: anti-streptolysin O and anti-DNase B titers. If the first test is not
confirmatory, it should be repeated 10 to 14 days later. This is recommended in all cases of ARF, as
throat cultures and rapid antigen tests are often negative.
Normal values for antistreptolysin O (ASO) and anti-DNase B titers
Table compiled by contributors.
• Rapid antigen tests: for group A  Streptococcus  (if available). It is important to note that rapid
antigen tests may have poorer positive and negative predictive value for group A streptococcal
pharyngitis compared with throat culture. Their use depends on the epidemiologic context and rapid
antigen tests may not be appropriate for use in high-incidence rheumatic fever populations when
cultures can be performed.[70] [71] Rapid antigen tests need local sensitivity and specificity testing.
• Rapid molecular tests: for group A  Streptococcus  (if available). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
assays can be used at the point-of-care with sensitivity and specificity comparable to throat
culture.[72] [73] [74] Use of molecular point-of-care testing has potential for wide application,
especially in rural high-incidence settings.[75]
Echocardiogram
There are published morphological and Doppler findings that are typical of acute rheumatic carditis.[2]
Doppler findings in rheumatic valvulitis
• Pathological mitral regurgitation (all 4 criteria met):
• Seen in at least two views
• Jet length ≥2 cm in at least one view
• Peak velocity >3 m/s
• Pansystolic jet in at least one envelope.
• Pathological aortic regurgitation (all 4 criteria met):
• Seen in at least two views
• Jet length ≥1 cm in at least one view
• Peak velocity >3 m/s
• Pan diastolic jet in at least one envelope.
Morphological findings on echocardiogram in rheumatic valvulitis
• Acute mitral valve changes
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
• Annular dilation
• Chordal elongation
• Chordal rupture resulting in flail leaflet with severe mitral regurgitation
• Anterior (or less commonly posterior) leaflet tip prolapse
• Beading/nodularity of leaflet tips.
• Chronic mitral valve changes (not seen in acute carditis)
• Leaflet thickening
• Chordal thickening and fusion
• Restricted leaflet motion
• Calcification.
• Aortic valve changes in either acute or chronic carditis
• Irregular or focal leaflet thickening
• Coaptation defect
• Restricted leaflet motion
• Leaflet prolapse.
Diagnosing recurrent rheumatic fever
Recurrence of rheumatic fever, with or without evidence of established RHD, requires the same criteria
as a primary episode (i.e., 2 major manifestations, or 1 major plus 2 minor manifestations) or can be
diagnosed with the presence of 3 minor manifestations. Diagnosis of recurrence requires evidence of a
recent group A streptococcal infection. As with primary episodes, it is important that other diagnoses have
been excluded.[1]
Demonstrating antecedent group A streptococcal infection
Evidence of antecedent group A streptococcal infection can be shown by demonstrating one of the
following:
• Elevated or rising streptococcal antibody titer
• Positive throat culture
• Positive rapid antigen test for group A streptococci (see comments above)
• Recent scarlet fever.
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
fever (common)
• Occurs in nearly all cases at the onset of the illness. Historically, most cases will have fever >102.2°F
(>39°C), but many experts suggest that 100.4°F (38°C) measured orally, rectally, or tympanic is
significant.
• The Jones criteria also recognize fever as a minor manifestation of disease: ≥101.3°F (≥38.5°C; low-
risk populations) or ≥100.4°F (≥38.0°C; moderate- to high-risk populations).[2]
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
joint pain (common)
• The pain is often extreme, and if the lower limbs are affected the patient often cannot walk. The most
commonly affected joints are the knees, ankles, wrists, elbows, and hips. Typically asymmetrical and
usually but not always migratory. A joint may be affected for a period of hours or a couple of days.
• If the patient has monoarthritis and is suspected to have acute rheumatic fever (ARF), but does not
meet the criteria for diagnosis, the patient should withhold from treatment with nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) so that the appearance of migratory polyarthritis (a major manifestation)
is not masked.
• The arthritis of ARF is very sensitive to salicylates such as aspirin (as well as other NSAIDs), and joint
symptoms typically respond within several days of treatment with anti-inflammatory drugs.
Other diagnostic factors
recent sore throat or scarlet fever (common)
• May suggest recent group A streptococcal pharyngitis.
recent skin infection (common)
• May suggest recent group A streptococcal pyoderma.
chest pain (common)
• This can be a symptom of severe carditis.
shortness of breath (common)
• This can be a symptom of severe carditis.
palpitations (common)
• Individuals with rheumatic carditis may experience palpitations in association with advanced heart
block. Those with longstanding rheumatic heart disease and left atrial dilatation are also predisposed
to atrial fibrillation.
heart murmur (common)
• Mitral regurgitation is the most common clinical manifestation of carditis as a pansystolic murmur
heard loudest at apex, radiating to axilla, and accentuated when the patient is rolled over on their left
side.
• A Carey-Coombs murmur may be heard, caused by pseudo-mitral stenosis because of the increased
flow of the regurgitant volume of blood over the mitral valve during diastolic filling of the left ventricle.
• Aortic valvulitis manifests as aortic regurgitation and is characterized by an early diastolic murmur
heard at the base of the heart, accentuated by the patient sitting forward in held expiration.
• The regurgitant murmurs are heard more commonly in children and young adolescents.
• Chronic rheumatic mitral stenosis produces an apical diastolic murmur, a low-pitched mid-diastolic
rumble that may be preceded by an opening snap.
•
pericardial rub (common)
• If there is pericardial involvement during the acute phase of acute rheumatic fever, a pericardial rub
may be heard.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
signs of cardiac failure (common)
• Patients with severe carditis may exhibit signs of congestive heart failure due to severe regurgitation
and impaired cardiac function.
swollen joints (common)
• Joint swelling, accompanied by tenderness, warmth, and restricted movement, indicates arthritis rather
than arthralgia. The most commonly affected joints are the knees, ankles, wrists, elbows, and hips.
Detection of arthritis of the hip joint can be more difficult than detection of arthritis involving other large
joints, and careful attention should be paid to limitation of movement and inability to bear weight. The
arthritis of acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is typically asymmetrical and usually but not always migratory.
A joint may be affected for a period of hours or a couple of days. Additional joints may flare up as one
or others improve.
• The arthritis of ARF is very sensitive to salicylates such as aspirin (as well as other nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs), and joint symptoms usually respond within several days of treatment with these
anti-inflammatory drugs. Some patients may present with pain and swelling affecting a single joint
(monoarthritis). Polyarthralgia is defined as arthritic pain and aches in the joints, joint pains, arthralgia
of multiple joints, and multiple joint pain. Arthralgia is a criterion in the revised Jones criteria.
restlessness (uncommon)
• May suggest chorea. Chorea is more common in females and may occur up to 6 months after group A
streptococcal throat infection. Chorea always disappears with sleep, and is made more pronounced by
purposeful movements.
clumsiness (uncommon)
• May suggest chorea, which more commonly affects females after a latency period of up to 6 months
after group A streptococcal throat infection. Chorea always disappears with sleep, and is made more
pronounced by purposeful movements.
emotional lability and personality changes (uncommon)
• May suggest chorea, which typically affects females after a latency period of up to 6 months after
group A streptococcal infection. Chorea always disappears with sleep, and is made more pronounced
by purposeful movements.
jerky, uncoordinated choreiform movements (uncommon)
• Can affect the whole body, or just one side of the body (hemichorea). The head is often involved, with
erratic movements of the face that resemble grimaces, grins, and frowns. Chorea always disappears
with sleep, and is made more pronounced by purposeful movements.
inability to maintain protrusion of the tongue (uncommon)
• Consistent with chorea affecting the tongue. May resemble a "bag of worms" when protruded.
milkmaid's grip (uncommon)
• Rhythmic squeezing when the patient grasps the examiner's hands, consistent with chorea.
spooning sign (uncommon)
• Flexion of the wrists and extension of the fingers when the hands are extended, seen with chorea.
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
pronator sign (uncommon)
• Turning outwards of the arms and palms when held above the head, seen with chorea.
erythema marginatum (uncommon)
• Pink serpiginous rash with a well-defined edge. It begins as a macule and expands with central
clearing. The rash may appear and then disappear before the examiner's eyes, leading to the
descriptive term of patients having "smoke rings" beneath the skin. Rare, occurring in <5% of cases.
Usually appears during the acute phase of rheumatic fever but may recur for weeks or even months
after the acute phase has subsided. Difficult to detect in dark skinned people.
Typical appearance of erythema marginatum on the back of a child with acute rheumatic fever
Courtesy of Professor Mike South, Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne; used with permission
May be accentuated by warmth and so is often noted during a bath or shower.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
subcutaneous nodules (uncommon)
• Firm and painless lumps, 0.5 cm to 2 cm in diameter, found mainly over the extensor surfaces or bony
protuberances, particularly on the extensor surfaces of the elbows, hands, feet, and over the occiput
and upper back. Rare, occurring in <5% of cases. Often appear after the onset of acute rheumatic
fever and last from a few days to 3 weeks.
pregnancy or taking oral contraceptive pill (uncommon)
• May be associated with recurrence of rheumatic chorea. Increased cardiac demands during pregnancy
may also lead to deterioration in cardiac status. In particular, pregnant women with rheumatic mitral
stenosis may develop breathlessness, fatigue, or palpitations.
Risk factors
Strong
poverty
• Acute rheumatic fever is a disease of poverty. The reduction in rates of rheumatic fever in high-
income countries was mostly due to changes in socioeconomic status and access to health care.[10]
[36] Although there are conflicting data from prevalence surveys regarding the association between
socioeconomic indicators and rheumatic heart disease (RHD), most surveys do confirm an association
with low socioeconomic conditions. For example, in a prevalence survey of RHD in children in
Rajasthan, India, the prevalence of RHD in the lowest socioeconomic status group was 3.9 in 1000,
in the middle socioeconomic status group it was 2.1 in 1000, and in the highest socioeconomic status
group no cases of RHD were detected.[37]
• An ecologic study from New Zealand that matched hospitalization data with census area unit data
(summated data for population parcels of approximately 5000 people) found rheumatic fever rates in
the most crowded quintile to be 23 times greater than that in the least crowded quintile.[38]
overcrowded living quarters
• Perhaps the most important environmental factor is household overcrowding.[36] [39] The classical
studies during the 1950s in US Air Force Base barracks found that rates of acquisition of streptococcal
infections increased when beds were moved closer together, thus providing a biological basis for
a relationship between overcrowding and the incidence of acute rheumatic fever.[40] Household
crowding has been shown to be strongly associated with rheumatic fever in New Zealand.[38]
family history of rheumatic fever
• An inherited susceptibility to acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is likely. Familial clustering of cases of ARF
has been described.[16] Earlier twin studies found weak concordance in monozygotic twins,[41] but a
more recent meta-analysis found that the risk of rheumatic fever in a monozygotic twin with a history
of rheumatic fever in the co-twin was 6 times greater than in dizygotic twins, suggesting that rheumatic
fever is a disorder with a high heritability.[17]
HLA association
• Particular HLA class II alleles appear to be associated with rheumatic fever susceptibility. HLA
DRB1, DQA1, and DQB1 haplotypes were associated with rheumatic heart disease in Egyptian
populations.[42]
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
genetic susceptibility
• Genome-wide association studies have identified susceptibility signals in immune loci. In Oceania
populations, an association has been observed between one common immunoglobulin heavy chain
allele (IGHV4-61*02) and rheumatic heart disease (RHD), with each copy of IGHV4-61*02 associated
with a 1.4-fold increase in the risk of RHD.[26] A second study found that variation at HLA-DQA1-
DQB1 was the major genetic risk factor for RHD among Aboriginal Australians.[27]
• Among peoples of Maori and Pacific ancestry in New Zealand, polymorphisms on the IL-6 gene have
been shown to be associated with increased incidence of RHD.[43] A multicenter study across 8
African countries identified a single RHD risk locus, 11q24.1, which reached genome-wide significance
in black African individuals.[28] Further multicountry data have solidified the genetic hypothesis
associated with developing RHD and unique proteomic signatures associated with severe RHD have
been identified.[44]
indigenous populations; Aboriginal Australian, Asian, and Pacific Islanders
• Particular racial and ethnic groups appear to be at higher risk of acute rheumatic fever than others.
This is particularly evident in countries where indigenous populations are at increased risk compared
with non-indigenous populations, including Maori children in New Zealand, Aboriginal children in
Australia, and Polynesian children in Hawaii.[22] [23] [24] [25] This appears to be a combination of
environmental factors such as overcrowding, poor access to health care (primary prevention), and an
underlying inherited susceptibility.
Weak
D8/17 B cell antigen positivity
• The D8/17 antigen is expressed on B cells and may act as a binding site for group A streptococci
on these cells.[45] There is a strong association in a number of populations between the expression
of D8/17 antigen and rheumatic fever, including in the US, Australia, Israel, Russia, Mexico, and
Chile.[18] [19] [20] However, this association is not universal as there has been no association found in
other populations including in the US,[21] and less strong associations in populations in India.[46]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
• The World Health Organization criteria include only elevated ESR or
leukocyte count as acute-phase reactants. The Jones criteria include
only elevated CRP or elevated ESR.[2]
• Australian data found that CRP and ESR were commonly elevated
in patients with confirmed acute rheumatic fever (excluding chorea),
whereas the leukocyte count usually was not elevated.[64] By
contrast <4% of patients had both a serum CRP level of <3 mg/dL
and an ESR of <30 mm/hour.[60] [64]
≥60 mm/hour (low-risk
populations) or ≥30 mm/
hour (moderate- to high-
risk populations) is taken
as evidence of elevated
inflammatory markers
(minor criterion)
CRP
• The World Health Organization criteria include only elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or leukocyte count as acute-
phase reactants. The Jones criteria include only elevated CRP or
elevated ESR.[2]
• Australian data found that CRP and ESR were commonly elevated
in patients with confirmed acute rheumatic fever (excluding chorea),
whereas the leukocyte count usually was not elevated.[64] By
contrast <4% of patients had both a serum CRP level of <3 mg/dL
and an ESR of <30 mm/hour.[60] [64]
≥3 mg/dL is taken as
evidence of elevated
inflammatory markers
(minor criterion)
WBC count
• The World Health Organization criteria include only elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) or leukocyte count as acute-
phase reactants. The Jones criteria include only elevated CRP or
elevated ESR.[2]
• Australian data found that CRP and ESR were commonly elevated
in patients with confirmed acute rheumatic fever (excluding chorea),
whereas the leukocyte count usually was not elevated.[64] Only
25% of patients with acute rheumatic fever had a leukocyte count
>15 x 10⁹/L, and only 7% had a count >20 x 10⁹/L. The authors do
not suggest including elevated leukocyte count as an acute-phase
reactant.
may be elevated, but not
recommended as meeting
the minor criterion
blood cultures
• Useful, if patient is febrile, to exclude bacteremia. Both osteoarticular
infection and infective endocarditis may present in similar patterns to
acute rheumatic fever.
no growth
electrocardiogram
• The duration of the PR interval increases with age; therefore, it is
important to use age-standardized values.
• Some healthy people have benign and incidental first-degree heart
block, but a prolonged PR interval that resolves over 2-3 weeks
may be a useful diagnostic feature in cases when the other clinical
features are not definitive. First-degree heart block sometimes
leads to a junctional rhythm, usually with a heart rate similar to the
sinus rate. Second-degree and even complete block (also known as
advanced atrioventricular block) are less common but can occur. In
a resurgence of acute rheumatic fever in the US, 32% of patients
prolonged PR interval is
a minor criterion of acute
rheumatic fever
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
Test Result
had abnormal atrioventricular conduction, usually a prolonged PR
interval.[11]
ECG showing heart block in acute rheumatic fever
Aust N Z J Med. 1996 Apr;26(2):241-2; used with permission
chest x-ray
• A chest x-ray should be performed in all cases in which carditis is
suspected. Cardiomegaly and/or congestive heart failure in acute
rheumatic fever as seen on chest x-ray, results from severe valvular
dysfunction secondary to valvulitis. Pericardial effusion should also
be considered in cases where significant cardiomegaly is present.[77]
may demonstrate
chamber enlargement
and congestive cardiac
failure
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
Chest x-ray of biventricular heart failure
due to acute carditis in rheumatic fever
Lancet. 2006 Jun 24;367(9528):2118; used with permission
echocardiogram
• An echocardiogram improves the specificity of the clinical diagnosis
(e.g., suspected mitral regurgitation may in fact be a flow murmur or
even congenital heart disease on echocardiography).[58]
• It may also improve sensitivity, as increasing recognition is being
given to the phenomenon of subclinical carditis (pathological
regurgitation detected on echocardiography in the absence of clinical
findings) occurring in approximately 17% of cases of acute rheumatic
fever.[67] [68] [78] [79]
• In addition to improving specificity and sensitivity, echocardiography
also enables more accurate grading of the severity of carditis and can
evaluate cardiac dimensions and function.
• The interpretation of echocardiography in patients with rheumatic
fever requires a great deal of expertise.
• There are published morphological and Doppler findings that are
characteristic of rheumatic carditis.[2]
may reveal morphological
changes to the mitral and/
or aortic valves; severity
of regurgitation (mitral,
aortic, and tricuspid);
pericardial effusion if
pericarditis present
throat culture
• A throat culture should be sent in all patients with acute rheumatic
fever. However, <10% of throat cultures are positive for group A
streptococci, reflecting the postinfectious nature of the disease; group
A streptococci have usually been eradicated before onset of the
disease.[69]
growth of beta-hemolytic
group A streptococci
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
Test Result
rapid antigen test for group A streptococci
• If available, a rapid antigen test can be performed; however, data
from New Zealand suggest that some of the tests may perform poorly
compared with throat cultures.[80]
positive
anti-streptococcal serology
• Positive serology is the most important means of demonstrating
antecedent infection. The most commonly used tests are the anti-
streptolysin O titer and the anti-deoxyribonuclease B titer. It is
generally recommended that paired titers be taken: an acute titer
and a convalescent titer (usually taken 14-28 days after the initial
sample). Elevated titers and/or a 4-fold rise or fall in titers are
required as proof of a recent immunologic response to group A
streptococcal infection. The upper limit of normal is different between
regions, but has been defined for the US and Australian pediatric
population.[81] [82]
above normal range
(region dependent)
rapid molecular test
• If available, rapid polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays can be
used at the point-of-care. Sensitivity and specificity is comparable to
throat culture.[72] [73] [74]
positive
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Septic arthritis • Usually only one joint
involved; not migratory;
patient looks toxic.
• Positive Gram stain from
synovial fluid aspirate.
• Culture of an organism from
aspirate.
• Elevated white cell count in
blood and on microscopy of
synovial fluid.
• May have positive blood
cultures. Imaging may show
features of infection (e.g.,
synovial enhancement,
periosteal collection,
intramedullary abscess).
Juvenile arthritis • Joint involvement persists
for many weeks, may have
small joint involvement.
May not have joint pain;
eye inflammation may be
present. Light pink rash
in systemic form. Other
systemic features such as
serositis may be present.
• Positive connective
tissue testing such as
positive rheumatoid factor,
antinuclear antibody,
anti-dsDNA, anticyclic
citrullinated peptide (anti-
CCP) IgG.
Post-infectious reactive
arthropathy
• History of preceding viral or
gastrointestinal illness.
• Positive infectious serology
(cytomegalovirus, Epstein-
Barr virus,  Yersinia ,
hepatitis B or C, parvovirus,
influenza).
• In young adults, urine
culture/nucleic acid
amplification test may
reveal recent gonorrhea or
chlamydia infection.
Lyme disease • Only applies to people from
Lyme endemic regions.
Early Lyme disease is
characterized by a circular
expanding rash with central
clearing (erythema migrans).
Later, Lyme disease
can cause influenza-like
symptoms; acute neurologic
problems, including cranial
nerve palsies; arthritis
usually affecting the knees;
heart block.
• Positive  Borrelia burgdoferi 
serology (may take 4-6
weeks to develop a serologic
response) or polymerase
chain reaction, together
with history of being in a
Lyme endemic region and
exposure to ticks.
Sickle cell anemia bone
crisis
• Family history; signs and
symptoms of anemia;
not usually febrile unless
• Anemia and sickle cells on
blood film.
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
infection has precipitated
bone crisis. May involve
small joints, back, dactylitis
(painful inflammation of
entire digit).
Infective endocarditis • Signs of sepsis. Peripheral
stigmata of endocarditis
(Janeway lesions, Osler
nodes, and splinter
hemorrhages) are relatively
uncommon in children.
• Positive blood culture
for organism causing
endocarditis.
• Echocardiogram may reveal
vegetations on valve leaflets,
intracardiac abscess.
Leukemia • History may include lethargy,
weight loss, night sweats,
and bone pain. Bruising or
spontaneous bleeding may
be present.
• Blast cells on film. Anemia or
thrombocytopenia.
Gout and pseudogout • First metacarpophalangeal
joint often affected; pain
excruciating and often flaky
red skin over affected joint.
• Polarizing microscopy of
synovial fluid or presence of
gouty tophi.
• Elevated uric acid level.
Innocent murmur • Otherwise normal child;
quiet murmur; never purely
diastolic.
• Normal echocardiogram.
Congenital mitral valve
prolapse
• Mid-systolic click on cardiac
auscultation.
• Echocardiogram reveals
characteristic billowing of
one or both of the mitral
valve leaflets into the left
atrium during/towards the
end of systole.
Congenital heart disease • Murmurs may be not
characteristic for mitral and/
or aortic incompetence.
Murmurs may have been
previously documented in
infancy.
• Echocardiography will reveal
abnormalities.
Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
• Afebrile; may be
asymptomatic.
• Echocardiography shows
hypertrophy of the left
ventricle without dilatation of
cavity.
Myocarditis • Usually follows a viral illness;
chest pain and shortness of
breath are common features.
• Troponin and creatine kinase
elevated.
• ECG may show saddle-
shaped ST segments or T-
wave changes.
• Cardiac MRI will
demonstrate myocarditic
inflammation.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
• Cardiac muscle biopsy will
demonstrate cardiac muscle
inflammation.
• Viral pathogens may be
detected on cardiac tissue
via polymerase chain
reaction.
Pericarditis • Pleuritic chest pain;
pericardial friction rubs on
auscultation.
• Echocardiography may show
a pericardial effusion.
Systemic lupus
erythematosus
• Malar "butterfly" rash; joint
pain typically affects hands
and wrists; renal involvement
is common, may have
anemia.
• Positive connective tissue
testing such as positive
antinuclear antibody, anti-
dsDNA, and anti-Smith
antibodies.
Drug intoxication • History of recent ingestion;
use of illicit drugs.
• Drug screen, including
phenytoin, amitriptyline, and
metoclopramide.
Wilson disease • Hepatosplenomegaly and
Kayser-Fleischer rings; may
have a family history.
• Decreased ceruloplasmin
level; genetic testing.
• 24-hour urinary copper
excretion.
Tic disorder • Can be motor or phonic tics;
absence of fever or any other
signs of acute rheumatic
fever.
• Psychiatric evaluation may
reveal underlying cause.
Encephalitis • Seizures, headache, fever;
sometimes photophobia and
neck stiffness.
• Electroencephalogram
may show temporal lobe
changes.
• MRI brain: features depend
on cause of encephalitis but
may include temporal lobe
hemorrhage or white matter
lesions.
• Polymerase chain reaction of
cerebrospinal fluid to detect
viral DNA/RNA.
Choreoathetoid cerebral
palsy
• Wide spectrum of symptoms
depending on severity;
features include difficulty
maintaining posture, scissor
walking, seizures, and
learning difficulties. Long-
term chronic features.
• Clinical diagnosis. CT may
help to identify cerebral
hemorrhage, and MRI can
be useful to look for changes
in cerebral white matter in
older children.
Huntington chorea • May have associated
symptoms of weight loss,
depression, facial tics,
impairment of rapid eye
• Genetic testing (triplet
repeat).
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
movement, and dementia.
More likely if a parent is
affected.
Intracranial tumor • May have headache,
typically worse in the
morning, with or without
vomiting; may have
papilledema; cranial nerve
involvement possible.
• CT/MRI of the brain.
Hyperthyroidism • Tachycardia, tremor, weight
loss.
• Eye signs: exophthalmia, lid
lag and retraction, proptosis.
• Thyroid function tests;
typically elevated thyroxine
(T4) and triiodothyronine
(T3) with suppression
of thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) in primary
hyperthyroidism. Secondary
hyperthyroidism will show
elevated TSH levels.
Osteomyelitis • May have history of open
fracture or recent orthopedic
surgery.
• Imaging (plain x-ray),
surgical findings, histology,
and cultures.
Criteria
Jones criteria[2]
The Jones criteria were established in 1944 to help clinicians make the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever
(ARF), as there is no single gold standard diagnostic test.[57] The criteria have been revised several times by
the American Heart Association in response to falling rates of ARF in the US. Early revisions increased the
specificity but reduced the sensitivity of the criteria.[83] [84] [85] [86] The 1992 update specified for the first
time that the criteria apply only to the initial diagnosis of ARF.
The 2015 revision of the criteria provide two different sets of criteria: one for low-risk populations (i.e., those
with a rheumatic fever incidence ≤2 in 100,000 school-aged children or all-age rheumatic heart disease
prevalence ≤1 in 1000 population per year) and one for moderate- to high-risk populations where increased
sensitivity is important.[2] Patients not clearly from a low-risk population are deemed to be at moderate-to-
high risk depending on their reference population.
Low-risk populations
• Five manifestations are considered major manifestations of ARF:
• Carditis (clinical and/or subclinical)
• Polyarthritis
• Chorea
• Erythema marginatum
• Subcutaneous nodules.
• Four manifestations are considered minor manifestations of ARF:
• Fever (≥101.3°F [≥38.5°C ])
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
• Polyarthralgia
• Elevated inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate [ESR] ≥60mm/hour and/or C-
reactive protein [CRP] ≥3.0 mg/dL)
• Prolonged PR interval on electrocardiogram.
Moderate- to high-risk populations
• Five manifestations are considered major manifestations of ARF:
• Carditis (clinical and/or subclinical)
• Arthritis (monoarthritis or polyarthritis; polyarthralgia can be considered as a major
manifestation if other causes are ruled out)
• Chorea
• Erythema marginatum
• Subcutaneous nodules.
• Four manifestations are considered minor manifestations of ARF:
• Fever (100.4°F [≥38.0°C])
• Monoarthralgia
• Elevated inflammatory markers (ESR ≥30 mm/hour and/or CRP ≥3.0 mg/dL)
• Prolonged PR interval on electrocardiogram.
Chorea does not require evidence of a preceding group A streptococcal infection. In a patient in whom
arthritis is considered a major manifestation, arthralgia cannot be counted as a minor manifestation. In a
patient in whom carditis is considered as a major manifestation, prolonged PR interval cannot be counted as
a minor manifestation.
Doppler echocardiogram findings in rheumatic valvulitis
• Pathological mitral regurgitation (all 4 criteria met):
• Seen in at least two views
• Jet length ≥2 cm in at least one view
• Peak velocity >3 m/s
• Pansystolic jet in at least one envelope.
• Pathological aortic regurgitation (all 4 criteria met):
• Seen in at least two views
• Jet length ≥1 cm in at least one view
• Peak velocity >3 m/s
• Pan diastolic jet in at least one envelope.
Morphological findings on echocardiogram in rheumatic valvulitis
• Acute mitral valve changes
• Annular dilation
• Chordal elongation
• Chordal rupture resulting in flail leaflet with severe mitral regurgitation
• Anterior (or less commonly posterior) leaflet tip prolapse
• Beading/nodularity of leaflet tips.
• Chronic mitral valve changes (not seen in acute carditis)
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Rheumatic fever Diagnosis
• Leaflet thickening
• Chordal thickening and fusion
• Restricted leaflet motion
• Calcification.
• Aortic valve changes in either acute or chronic carditis
• Irregular or focal leaflet thickening
• Coaptation defect
• Restricted leaflet motion
• Leaflet prolapse.
Recurrent ARF
• Patients who have had a single episode of rheumatic fever are at high risk of subsequent episodes of
recurrent rheumatic fever. The Jones criteria allow diagnosis of recurrent rheumatic fever if there are:
• 2 major manifestations, or
• 1 major and 2 minor manifestations, or
• 3 minor manifestations.
All other likely diagnoses should be excluded before a diagnosis of recurrent rheumatic fever, especially in
patients presenting with 3 minor manifestations.
Screening
Screening, also known as active case-finding, of asymptomatic populations in high-risk regions has the
potential to identify patients with mild rheumatic heart disease (RHD) who may receive the greatest benefit
from secondary prophylaxis.[87] Auscultation-based standard screening protocols were first developed
by the World Health Organization and focused on screening of school-aged children.[88] In these early
screening programs, follow-up echocardiography was recommended for suspected cases with pathologic
murmurs. However, a landmark 2007 study conducted in Cambodia and Mozambique demonstrated that
echocardiography was more sensitive and more specific than cardiac auscultation, and detected RHD 10
times more than auscultation alone. The authors concluded that echocardiography should be the initial
procedure.[89] Multiple studies since then have implemented echocardiographic screening.[90] Standardized
guidelines for the diagnosis of RHD on echocardiogram were developed by an expert panel and published in
2012.[58] Data on outcomes of children with echocardiographically detected RHD show differential medium-
term outcomes, from regression of lesions (improvement) to progression (worsening); the GOAL study
demonstrated that secondary prophylaxis given for 24 months was associated with less progression of
valve lesions.[91] The study also noted no association between the prophylaxis group and no prophylaxis
group in improvement of lesions, and so the role of widespread echocardiographic screening in public health
surveillance is unclear and an integrated approach into the healthcare system is preferred.[92]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
MANAGEMENT
Approach
No treatments affect the outcome of acute rheumatic fever (ARF). While treatment can shorten the acute
inflammation, all of the various manifestations will resolve spontaneously, except for carditis. The degree of
valvular regurgitation usually improves but may occasionally progress in the months following a diagnosis
of rheumatic fever. No treatment used in the acute phase is effective at modifying the acute course of
carditis, and good adherence with secondary prophylaxis is the only treatment known to ameliorate the long-
term progression to rheumatic heart disease (RHD); the major role of secondary prevention after ARF is
prevention of rheumatic fever recurrences and cumulative subsequent repeat valve damage.[96]
Aims of acute management
The aims of management are to:
• Confirm the diagnosis of ARF
• Provide symptomatic treatment and shorten the acute inflammatory phase, particularly polyarthritis,
which can be very painful
• Provide education for the patient and the patient's family
• Begin secondary prophylaxis and emphasize its importance
• Offer dental treatment and education regarding prevention of infective endocarditis
• Ensure follow-up.
All patients with suspected ARF should be admitted to the hospital so diagnosis can be confirmed, and
clinical features and severity of the attack can be assessed. Some patients with a confirmed diagnosis
and mild illness may be managed as outpatients after an initial period of stabilization.
Unconfirmed diagnosis, presenting with monoarthritis
If ARF is suspected, admission to the hospital for observation and further investigation is indicated.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and salicylates such as aspirin should be withheld
pending confirmation of the diagnosis, and simple analgesics, such as acetaminophen, are recommended
in the interim. NSAIDs and aspirin are withheld to facilitate diagnosis; they reduce arthritic pain but do
not affect the long-term outcome of the disease. For example, if there is doubt about the diagnosis in
a patient with monoarthritis, the appearance of migratory polyarthritis will confirm rheumatic fever. A
preferable strategy in patients with suspected rheumatic fever is bed rest and regular acetaminophen
while performing investigations to confirm the diagnosis as quickly as possible. Once the diagnosis is
confirmed, start the patient on regular NSAIDs.
Opioid analgesics are generally not recommended, especially in children. They should be avoided
wherever possible. If they are necessary, they should be used with extreme caution. Codeine is
contraindicated in children younger than 12 years of age, and it is not recommended in adolescents 12
to 18 years of age who are obese or have conditions such as obstructive sleep apnea or severe lung
disease as it may increase the risk of breathing problems.[97] It is generally recommended only for the
treatment of acute moderate pain, which cannot be successfully managed with other analgesics, in
children 12 years of age and older. It should be used at the lowest effective dose for the shortest period
and treatment limited to 3 days.[98] [99]
Confirmed ARF
The outcome of rheumatic valvular lesions has not been shown to be affected by the administration of
penicillin during an episode of ARF.[100] However, penicillin is recommended to ensure eradication of
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
streptococci in the throat whether there has been a positive throat culture or not. A single injection of
penicillin G benzathine is the recommended primary option. Oral penicillin is an option if intramuscular
penicillin is refused; however, adherence needs to be closely monitored. Intravenous penicillin is not
necessary. In general, penicillin G benzathine is recommended as this also serves the purpose of acting
as the first dose of secondary prophylaxis. Oral erythromycin is an option for patients allergic to penicillin
and adherence should be closely monitored. As penicillin is the first-line choice for secondary prophylaxis,
it is recommended that a patient with reported penicillin allergy be carefully evaluated. Referral to an
allergist may be necessary and desensitization may be appropriate in some circumstances, under careful
medical supervision. Education is a second key component of the acute management of all patients with
rheumatic fever because of the necessity of ongoing long-term preventive measures.
Particular management approaches are needed for the three main manifestations of ARF.
• Arthritis
• Carditis
• Chorea
With arthritis
Historically, the first-line treatment for rheumatic arthritis has been salicylate therapy (aspirin).[57] [101]
[102] [103] Increasingly, clinicians are recommending NSAID treatment. Naproxen has been used
successfully, and some experts recommend naproxen as first-line treatment because of its twice-daily
dosing, superior side-effect profile, and reduced risk of Reye syndrome.[104] [105]
Ibuprofen has also been successfully used in children, although there are no specific data regarding its
effectiveness in children with rheumatic fever.[63]
If the patient has monoarthritis and is suspected to have ARF, but does not meet the criteria for diagnosis,
the patient should withhold from salicylate therapy or NSAID treatment so that the appearance of
migratory polyarthritis (a major manifestation) is not masked. Acetaminophen can be given in the interim.
Aspirin and NSAIDs usually have a dramatic effect on the arthritis and fever of rheumatic fever, and
typically this improves within 2 to 3 days after the initiation of regular treatment. Persisting rheumatic
arthritis can occasionally occur, usually this is in children with ongoing significant systemic inflammation.
With carditis
Most patients with mild or moderate carditis without cardiac failure are asymptomatic and do not require
specific cardiac medications.
A subset of patients with carditis who develop cardiac failure do require treatment:
• Bed rest with ambulation as tolerated
• Medical management of heart failure; first-line therapy consists of diuretics and angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.
Despite the absence of high-quality evidence to support the use of glucocorticoid therapy for patients
with severe carditis and heart failure, many clinicians treating rheumatic fever think that the use of
glucocorticoids can speed recovery. Two meta-analyses have failed to show any benefit of glucocorticoids
over placebo, although contributing studies were old and generally of low quality.[96] [106]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
MANAGEMENT
There is no evidence that salicylates or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) improve the outcome from
carditis in rheumatic fever and their use is not recommended.[107] Rarely, a patient with atrial fibrillation
may require anti-arrhythmic treatment with amiodarone or digoxin.
Carditis can progress over weeks to months, and serial echocardiography is recommended for individuals
with severe carditis, changing murmurs, and/or persistent inflammation.
For patients with severe carditis requiring surgery, surgery is deferred wherever possible, until systemic
inflammation has settled. In rare circumstances, urgent and life-saving surgery may be necessary for
complications such as acute valve leaflet rupture or chordae tendineae rupture.
Wherever feasible, cardiac valve repair is the preferred surgical procedure for established RHD, as it
spares the patient the considerable additional risks associated with lifelong anticoagulation. Repair may
not be possible in some situations where valvular tissues are extremely friable or severely chronically
damaged.
With chorea
Most patients with chorea do not require treatment, as chorea is benign and self-limiting. Most symptoms
resolve within weeks and almost all within 6 months. Reassurance and a quiet and calm environment
often suffice.
Treatment is reserved for severe chorea that puts the person at risk of injury or is extremely disabling
or distressing. Valproic acid or carbamazepine may be used. Valproic acid may be more effective than
carbamazepine, but carbamazepine is preferred as first-line treatment because of the potential for
liver toxicity with valproic acid.[63] [108] Valproic acid and its derivatives may cause major congenital
malformations, including neurodevelopmental disorders and neural tube defects, after in utero exposure.
These agents must not be used in female patients of childbearing potential unless other options
are unsuitable, there is a pregnancy prevention program in place, and certain conditions are met.
Precautionary measures may also be required in male patients owing to a potential risk that use in the
3 months leading up to conception may increase the likelihood of neurodevelopmental disorders in their
children. Regulations and precautionary measures for female and male patients may vary between
countries and you should consult your local guidance for more information.
Treatment may ameliorate symptoms of chorea completely, or simply reduce them. Usually it takes 1-2
weeks for medication to have an effect, and it is recommended that treatment continue for 2-4 weeks after
chorea has subsided. Haloperidol and combinations of agents should be avoided.
A number of small studies have suggested that IVIG treatment can allow a more rapid recovery from
rheumatic chorea.[109] [110] However, until further evidence is available, IVIG should not be considered
as standard treatment and should be reserved for consideration in patients with severe chorea that is
refractory to other treatments.
Secondary prophylaxis
The role of secondary prophylaxis is to prevent further group A streptococcal infections and recurrent
episodes of overt or silent rheumatic fever leading to worsening of heart valve damage. Although some
mild cases of carditis do heal completely, the progression to severe RHD is poorly understood. Secondary
prophylaxis may reduce the clinical severity and thus mortality of RHD and lead to regression of RHD if
patients are adherent over a decade.[111] [112] The most effective antibiotic is penicillin and the most
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
effective method of delivery is intramuscular injection of long-acting penicillin G benzathine every 3-4
weeks.[113] [114] Patients with proven penicillin allergy can be managed with oral erythromycin.[1]
In patients with possible rheumatic fever (i.e., patients, generally in high-incidence settings, in whom
the clinician is highly suspicious of the diagnosis of ARF but who do not quite meet the Jones criteria,
perhaps because full testing facilities are not available),[2] it is reasonable to offer a shorter period
of secondary prophylaxis followed by re-evaluation (including an echocardiogram). This should be
done in consultation with the child and family, and with careful consideration of the patient's individual
circumstances and family history. In patients with recurrent and/or atypical joint symptoms despite good
adherence with penicillin prophylaxis, it is also important to consider the possibility of other rheumatologic
diagnoses, such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis.
Following growing evidence that patients with RHD who have severe valvular heart disease with or
without reduced ventricular function may be dying from cardiovascular compromise following penicillin
G benzathine injections, the American Heart Association (AHA) now strongly advises that patients with
RHD at elevated risk receive oral antibiotic prophylaxis, preferably oral penicillin, if readily available.[115]
The AHA notes that patients with elevated risk include those with severe mitral stenosis, aortic stenosis,
and aortic insufficiency, those with decreased left ventricular systolic dysfunction, and those with no
symptoms; for these patients, the AHA believes the risk of adverse reaction to penicillin G benzathine,
specifically cardiovascular compromise, may outweigh its theoretical benefit.[115]
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Initial ( summary )
monoarthritis in unconfirmed
rheumatic fever
1st analgesia
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute ( summary )
possible rheumatic fever
1st secondary prophylaxis
confirmed rheumatic fever
1st antibiotic therapy
with arthritis plus salicylate therapy or NSAID
with heart failure plus diuretic ± ACE inhibitors
adjunct glucocorticoids
with atrial fibrillation plus amiodarone or digoxin
with valve leaflet or
chordae tendineae
rupture
plus assessment for emergency valve surgery
with severe or disabling
chorea
adjunct anticonvulsants
Ongoing ( summary )
all patients following acute
treatment
1st secondary prophylaxis
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Initial
monoarthritis in unconfirmed
rheumatic fever
1st analgesia
Primary options
» acetaminophen: children: 10-15 mg/kg
every 4-6 hours when required, maximum 75
mg/kg/day; adults: 325-1000 mg orally every
4-6 hours when required, maximum 4000 mg/
day
Secondary options
» codeine sulfate: children: contraindicated
in children <12 years of age and use caution
in children 12-18 years of age; adults: 15-60
mg orally every 4-6 hours when required,
maximum 360 mg/day
» If a diagnosis of rheumatic fever has not
been established, aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) should be withheld
and simple analgesics, such as acetaminophen,
are recommended.
» Aspirin and NSAIDs are withheld to facilitate
diagnosis; they reduce arthritic pain but do not
affect the long-term outcome of the disease. For
example, if there is doubt about the diagnosis
in a patient with monoarthritis, the appearance
of migratory polyarthritis will confirm rheumatic
fever.
» A preferable strategy in patients with
suspected rheumatic fever is bed rest and
regular acetaminophen while performing
investigations to confirm the diagnosis as quickly
as possible. Once the diagnosis is confirmed,
start the patient on regular NSAIDs.
» Opioid analgesics are generally not
recommended, especially in children. They
should be avoided wherever possible. If they
are necessary, they should be used with
extreme caution. Codeine is contraindicated
in children aged younger than 12 years, and
it is not recommended in adolescents aged
12-18 years who are obese or have conditions
such as obstructive sleep apnea or severe lung
disease as it may increase the risk of breathing
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
MANAGEMENT
Initial
problems.[97] It is generally recommended only
for the treatment of acute moderate pain, which
cannot be successfully managed with other
analgesics, in children aged 12 years and older.
It should be used at the lowest effective dose
for the shortest period and treatment limited to 3
days.[98] [99]
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
Acute
possible rheumatic fever
1st secondary prophylaxis
Primary options
» penicillin G benzathine: children ≤27 kg
body weight: 600,000 units intramuscularly
every 3-4 weeks; children >27 kg body weight
and adults: 1.2 million units intramuscularly
every 3-4 weeks
Secondary options
» penicillin V potassium: children and adults:
250 mg orally twice daily
OR
» erythromycin base: children and adults: 250
mg orally twice daily
» In patients with possible rheumatic fever (i.e.,
patients, generally in high-incidence settings,
in whom the clinician is highly suspicious of
the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever but who
do not quite meet the Jones criteria, perhaps
because full testing facilities are not available),[2]
it is reasonable to offer a shorter period of
secondary prophylaxis followed by re-evaluation
(including an echocardiogram). This should be
done in consultation with the child and family,
and with careful consideration of the patient's
individual circumstances and family history.
» The most effective antibiotic is penicillin
and the most effective method of delivery is
intramuscular injection of long-acting penicillin
G benzathine every 3-4 weeks.[113] [114]
Intramuscular penicillin G benzathine reduces
streptococcal pharyngitis by 71% to 91% and
reduces recurrent rheumatic fever by 87% to
96%.[114]
» Oral penicillin is an option reserved for
patients who refuse intramuscular penicillin G
benzathine; however, it is less effective and
associated with a higher risk of recurrence.[63]
[114]
» Patients with proven penicillin allergy can be
managed with oral erythromycin.[1] Penicillin is
safe in pregnancy.[1] Anticoagulation is not a
contraindication to intramuscular injections of
penicillin G benzathine. Penicillin allergy should
be thoroughly investigated. Refer to a specialist
if required, as penicillin remains first choice for
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
secondary prophylaxis and desensitization may
be appropriate in some circumstances.
» In patients with recurrent or atypical joint
symptoms despite being adherent to the
secondary prophylaxis regimen, particularly
for those without echocardiographic evidence
of valvulitis, other rheumatologic diagnoses
should be considered, such as juvenile idiopathic
arthritis.
confirmed rheumatic fever
confirmed rheumatic fever 1st antibiotic therapy
Primary options
» penicillin G benzathine: children ≤27 kg:
600,000 units intramuscularly as a single
dose; children >27 kg and adults: 1.2 million
units intramuscularly as a single dose
Secondary options
» penicillin V potassium: children ≤27 kg: 250
mg orally two to three times daily for 10 days;
children >27 kg and adults: 500 mg orally two
to three times daily for 10 days
OR
» erythromycin base: children: 30-50 mg/kg/
day orally given in 3-4 divided doses for 10
days, maximum 1000-2000 mg/day; adults:
250-500 mg orally four times daily for 10 days
» A single injection of penicillin G benzathine
is the recommended primary option. Oral
penicillin is an option if intramuscular penicillin is
refused; however, adherence needs to be closely
monitored.
» Oral erythromycin is an option for patients
allergic to penicillin; adherence should be closely
monitored.
» Penicillin allergy should be thoroughly
investigated; refer to a specialist if required as
penicillin remains first choice for secondary
prophylaxis.
with arthritis plus salicylate therapy or NSAID
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» aspirin: children: 50-60 mg/kg/day orally
given in divided doses every 4 hours, may
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
Acute
increase to 80-100 mg/kg/day if required;
adults: 4000 mg/day orally given in divided
doses every 4-6 hours
OR
» naproxen: children >2 years of age: 10-20
mg/kg/day orally given in divided doses every
12 hours, maximum 1000 mg/day; adults:
250-500 mg orally twice daily, maximum 1250
mg/day
OR
» ibuprofen: children >6 months of age: 5-10
mg/kg orally every 8 hours, maximum 40
mg/kg/day; adults 400-800 mg orally every 8
hours, maximum 2400 mg/day
» Aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) usually have a dramatic effect on
the arthritis of rheumatic fever. Increasingly,
clinicians are recommending NSAID treatment.
Naproxen has been used successfully, and
some experts recommend naproxen as first-
line treatment because of its twice-daily dosing,
superior side-effect profile, and reduced risk
of Reye syndrome.[105] Ibuprofen has been
successfully used in children, although there are
no specific data regarding its effectiveness in
children with rheumatic fever.
» Most patients will only require treatment for 1-2
weeks, although some patients need it for up to
6-8 weeks.
» Very high and prolonged doses of aspirin
should be avoided due to the risk of salicylate
toxicity. Toxic effects of aspirin include tinnitus,
headache, and tachypnea, and may start to
occur above levels of 20 mg/100 dL. They will
usually resolve within a few days of stopping
aspirin. Salicylate levels should be monitored if
facilities are available.
» As the dose is reduced, joint symptoms may
recur (so-called “rebound phenomenon”). This
does not represent a recurrence of rheumatic
fever, and can be simply treated with another
brief course of high-dose aspirin.
» Stopping aspirin therapy should be considered
in the setting of a concurrent viral illness
because of the risk of Reye syndrome. If
aspirin is given during the influenza season,
then influenza vaccine may be given as a
precautionary measure.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
with heart failure plus diuretic ± ACE inhibitors
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» furosemide: children (intravenous): 1-2 mg/
kg intravenously every 6-12 hours initially,
increase by 1 mg/kg every 2 hours according
to response, maximum 6 mg/kg/dose;
children (oral): 1-2 mg/kg orally every 6-8
hours initially, increase by 1-2 mg/kg every
6-8 hours according to response, maximum
6 mg/kg/dose; adults (intravenous): 20-40
mg intravenously initially, increase by 20 mg/
dose every 2 hours according to response;
adults (oral): 20-80 mg orally every 6-8 hours,
increase by 20-40 mg/dose every 6-8 hours
according to response, maximum 600 mg/day
Dose should be titrated according to
response and lowest effective dose used
once stable.
OR
» spironolactone: children: 1-3 mg/kg/day
orally given in divided doses every 6-12
hours; adults: 25-200 mg/day orally given in
1-2 divided doses
Secondary options
» enalapril: children: consult specialist for
guidance on dose; adults: 2.5 mg orally twice
daily initially, increase gradually according to
response, maximum 40 mg/day
-or-
» lisinopril: children: consult specialist for
guidance on dose; adults: 2.5 to 5 mg
orally once daily initially, increase gradually
according to response, maximum 40 mg/day
-or-
» captopril: children: consult specialist for
guidance on dose; adults: 6.25 mg orally
three times daily initially, increase gradually
according to response, maximum 450 mg/day
--AND--
» furosemide: children (intravenous): 1-2 mg/
kg intravenously every 6-12 hours initially,
increase by 1 mg/kg every 2 hours according
to response, maximum 6 mg/kg/dose;
children (oral): 1-2 mg/kg orally every 6-8
hours initially, increase by 1-2 mg/kg every
6-8 hours according to response, maximum
6 mg/kg/dose; adults (intravenous): 20-40
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
Acute
mg intravenously initially, increase by 20 mg/
dose every 2 hours according to response;
adults (oral): 20-80 mg orally every 6-8 hours,
increase by 20-40 mg/dose every 6-8 hours
according to response, maximum 600 mg/day
Dose should be titrated according to
response and lowest effective dose used
once stable.
» Diuretics are usually used first and are
effective in mild to moderate heart failure.
Furosemide and spironolactone are the most
commonly used diuretics.
» For severe heart failure, particularly when
aortic regurgitation is present, then angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors can be given
in addition to furosemide. Enalapril, captopril,
and lisinopril are the most commonly used
ACE inhibitors. Spironolactone is not usually
used in combination with ACE inhibitors as the
combination can result in hyperkalemia.
adjunct glucocorticoids
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» prednisone: children and adults: 1-2 mg/kg/
day orally for 7 days, maximum 80 mg/day
» Corticosteroids are not indicated for patients
with mild and moderate carditis, but may be
indicated for a subset of patients with severe
carditis, cardiac failure, and/or pericardial
effusion.
» The side effects of glucocorticoids include
gastrointestinal bleeding and fluid retention,
both of which can worsen heart failure.
Glucocorticoids also have immunosuppressive
effects.
» Concurrent administration of omeprazole
should be considered to reduce the risk of
gastrointestinal bleeding.
» Glucocorticoids will usually also control joint
pain and fever, and so anti-inflammatory drugs
may not be required while the patient is being
treated with glucocorticoids. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may need to be
restarted after the patient completes the course
of glucocorticoids, particularly if this course is
short.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
» If more than 1 week of treatment is required,
taper by 20% to 25% each week.
» Despite the absence of high-quality evidence
to support the use of glucocorticoid therapy for
patients with carditis and severe heart failure,
some clinicians treating rheumatic fever believe
that the use of glucocorticoids can speed
recovery. Two meta-analyses have failed to show
any benefit of glucocorticoids over placebo,
although contributing studies were old and
generally of low quality.[96] [106]
with atrial fibrillation plus amiodarone or digoxin
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» digoxin: children and adults: consult
specialist for guidance on dose
OR
» amiodarone: children and adults: consult
specialist for guidance on dose
» Rarely, a patient with atrial fibrillation
may require antiarrhythmic treatment with
amiodarone or digoxin. The advice of a
cardiologist is recommended before starting
therapy.
» Thyroid function should be monitored with
amiodarone therapy.
» Digoxin is very rarely used in children. It has
a narrow therapeutic window and its use is
associated with increased mortality in patients
with rheumatic heart disease.[116] Serum levels
should be monitored during treatment.
with valve leaflet or
chordae tendineae
rupture
plus assessment for emergency valve surgery
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» This may be necessary in patients with acute
decompensated heart and/or multiorgan failure.
Valve repair surgery is normally preferred for
elective surgery of a rheumatic valve, but may
not be possible in acute rupture due to the
friability of inflamed tissue.
with severe or disabling
chorea
adjunct anticonvulsants
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
Acute
» carbamazepine: children and adults:
consult specialist for guidance on dose
Secondary options
» valproic acid: children and adults: consult
specialist for guidance on dose
» Treatment is not usually required unless the
chorea is severe and puts the person at risk of
injury, or is extremely disabling or distressing for
the patient.
» Valproic acid or carbamazepine may be
used. Valproic acid may be more effective than
carbamazepine, but carbamazepine is preferred
as first-line treatment because of the potential
for liver toxicity with valproic acid.[63] [108]
 Valproic acid and its derivatives may cause
major congenital malformations, including
neurodevelopmental disorders and neural
tube defects, after in utero exposure. These
agents must not be used in female patients of
childbearing potential unless other options are
unsuitable, there is a pregnancy prevention
program in place, and certain conditions are met.
Precautionary measures may also be required in
male patients owing to a potential risk that use
in the 3 months leading up to conception may
increase the likelihood of neurodevelopmental
disorders in their children. Regulations and
precautionary measures for female and male
patients may vary between countries and you
should consult your local guidance for more
information.
» Treatment may ameliorate symptoms of chorea
completely or simply reduce them. Usually it
takes 1-2 weeks for medication to have an effect
and it is recommended that treatment continue
for 2-4 weeks after chorea has subsided.
» Liver transaminases should be monitored with
carbamazepine.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
all patients following acute
treatment
1st secondary prophylaxis
Primary options
» penicillin G benzathine: children ≤27 kg
body weight: 600,000 units intramuscularly
every 3-4 weeks; children >27 kg body weight
and adults: 1.2 million units intramuscularly
every 3-4 weeks
Secondary options
» penicillin V potassium: children and adults:
250 mg orally twice daily
OR
» erythromycin base: children and adults: 250
mg orally twice daily
» The most effective antibiotic is penicillin
and the most effective method of delivery is
intramuscular injection of long-acting penicillin
G benzathine every 3-4 weeks.[113] [114]
Intramuscular penicillin G benzathine reduces
streptococcal pharyngitis by 71% to 91% and
reduces rheumatic fever recurrences by 87% to
96%.[114]
» Secondary prophylaxis can reduce the clinical
severity and mortality of rheumatic heart disease
(RHD) and lead to regression of RHD by about
50% to 70% if patients are adherent over a
decade.[111] [112]
» The duration of secondary prophylaxis is
determined by a number of factors, including
age, time since last episode of acute rheumatic
fever, and severity of cardiac disease.
Recommended duration of prophylaxis also
varies across clinical guidelines.[1] [63] [95]
[117]
» Following growing evidence that patients with
RHD who have severe valvular heart disease
with or without reduced ventricular function
may be dying from cardiovascular compromise
following penicillin G benzathine injections, the
American Heart Association (AHA) now strongly
advises that patients with RHD at elevated risk
receive oral antibiotic prophylaxis, preferably
oral penicillin, if readily available.[115] The AHA
notes that patients with elevated risk include
those with severe mitral stenosis, aortic stenosis,
and aortic insufficiency, those with decreased
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
Ongoing
left ventricular systolic dysfunction, and those
with no symptoms; for these patients, the AHA
believes the risk of adverse reaction to penicillin
G benzathine, specifically cardiovascular
compromise, may outweigh its theoretical
benefit.[115]
» Patients with proven penicillin allergy can be
managed with oral erythromycin.[1] Penicillin is
safe in pregnancy.[1]
» Penicillin allergy should be thoroughly
investigated. Refer to a specialist if required,
as penicillin remains first choice for secondary
prophylaxis and desensitization may be possible.
Anticoagulation is not a contraindication
to intramuscular injections of penicillin G
benzathine.
Primary prevention
Primary prevention of rheumatic fever refers to the appropriate and timely antibiotic treatment of group A
streptococcal pharyngitis and skin infections. This is recommended in populations at high risk of rheumatic
fever/chronic rheumatic heart disease, and for individuals who may have personal risk factors for rheumatic
fever (e.g., family history of rheumatic fever).[47] If commenced within 9 days of the onset of sore throat
symptoms, intramuscular or oral administration of penicillin will usually prevent the development of acute
rheumatic fever (ARF).[48] [49]
Shorter courses of oral antibiotics may have comparable efficacy to standard 10-day courses of oral penicillin
in treating pediatric patients with acute streptococcal pharyngitis.[50]
However, there are no data regarding the prevention of rheumatic fever with shorter courses.
A meta-analysis of studies of community-based primary prevention programs reported a reduction in risk
of ARF by 59%.[51] However, only 1 of the 6 studies included in the meta-analysis was a randomized
controlled trial, and this did not demonstrate a statistically significant treatment effect.[52] In New Zealand,
one large-scale national rheumatic fever prevention program, centered around sore throat case finding,
was implemented in 2011.[53] In one particular high-risk area, investigators observed a 58% reduction in
rheumatic fever incidence among 5- to 13-year olds from 88 in 100,000 (95% CI 79 to 111) to 37 in 100,000
(95% CI 15 to 83).[54]
In low-income and middle-income countries where ARF is common, some experts assert that intensive sore
throat surveillance and treatment programs cannot currently be recommended as coordinated public health
programs because they have substantial cost implications.[55] However, local reports have demonstrated
cost-effectiveness of primary prevention strategies, with one study also suggesting tailored approaches
to reduce ARF in Africa.[56] Investigation and treatment of sore throat should continue to be promoted in
settings where this strategy is feasible.
Secondary prevention
The main priority of long-term management is to ensure secondary prophylaxis is adhered to. Secondary
prophylaxis is clinically effective to prevent recurrent episodes of group A streptococcal infection and is cost-
effective.[122] [123]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
MANAGEMENT
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines secondary prophylaxis for rheumatic fever as "the continuous
administration of specific antibiotics to patients with a previous attack of rheumatic fever, or well-documented
rheumatic heart disease (RHD). The purpose is to prevent colonization or infection of the upper respiratory
tract with group A streptococci and the development of recurrent attacks of rheumatic fever."[1] Use of
secondary prophylaxis in children with latent RHD (detected by echocardiography) was associated with less
progression of valve lesions.[91]
The most effective antibiotic is penicillin and the most effective method of delivery of penicillin is by
intramuscular injection of long-acting penicillin G benzathine every 3 to 4 weeks.[113] [114]
Intramuscular penicillin G benzathine reduces streptococcal pharyngitis by 71% to 91% and reduces
recurrent rheumatic fever by 87% to 96%.[114]
The internationally accepted dosage of penicillin G benzathine is the same as that for eradication of
streptococci used during the acute attack.[1] [124] Recommendations on the frequency of intramuscular
injections and the duration of secondary prophylaxis vary between authorities. The WHO does not specify
whether injections should be administered every 3 weeks or every 4 weeks. Some experts recommend
injections every 3 weeks for patients at high risk (moderate to severe carditis or previous breakthrough
case of acute rheumatic fever [ARF]), based on evidence that suggests that fewer recurrent episodes of
ARF occur with this regimen.[125] The duration of secondary prophylaxis is determined by a number of
factors, including age, time since last episode of ARF, and severity of disease. Recommended duration
of prophylaxis varies across clinical guidelines.[1] [63] [95] [117] Following growing evidence that patients
with RHD who have severe valvular heart disease with or without reduced ventricular function may be
dying from cardiovascular compromise following penicillin G benzathine injections, the American Heart
Association (AHA) now strongly advises that patients with RHD at elevated risk receive oral antibiotic
prophylaxis, preferably oral penicillin, if readily available.[115] The AHA notes that patients with elevated
risk include those with severe mitral stenosis, aortic stenosis, and aortic insufficiency, those with decreased
left ventricular systolic dysfunction, and those with no symptoms; for these patients, the AHA believes the
risk of adverse reaction to penicillin G benzathine, specifically cardiovascular compromise, may outweigh its
theoretical benefit.[115]
Patients with proven penicillin allergy should be managed with twice-daily oral erythromycin.[1] Penicillin is
safe in pregnancy.[1] Intramuscular injections of penicillin G benzathine are considered sufficiently safe for
anticoagulated patients.
Endocarditis prophylaxis
There is a lack of international consensus regarding the effectiveness of antibiotic prophylaxis for
endocarditis. While this is not recommended in the UK, current guidelines from the American Heart
Association conclude that it is reasonable to recommend antibiotic prophylaxis for individuals with certain
forms of valvular heart disease (including prosthetic heart valves, annuloplasty rings) prior to dental
procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissue, manipulation of the periapical region of teeth, or
perforation of the oral mucosa, for the prevention of infective endocarditis.[126] [127] In Australia and New
Zealand, patients with RHD have been found to have a substantially increased risk of endocarditis.[128]
Australian guidelines recommend antibiotic prophylaxis if patients are having a procedure associated with
a high risk of bacteremia that is associated with endocarditis and they have a cardiac condition associated
with an increased risk of developing infective endocarditis and the highest risk of adverse outcomes from
endocarditis.[63] New Zealand guidelines recommend antibiotic prophylaxis for those with established RHD
or prosthetic valves if they are having procedures expected to produce bacteremia.[95]
Pneumococcal and influenza vaccination are recommended for patients with RHD, particularly those with
severe heart involvement and heart failure.
Patient discussions
The most crucial advice for patients is the importance of adhering to secondary prophylaxis. A first attack
not involving the heart does not necessarily mean that subsequent attacks will also spare the heart.
[64] This should include education about rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease, underlining the
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Rheumatic fever Management
importance of treating sore throats early and recommending a nonpenicillin antibiotic for streptococcal
pharyngitis if the patient is taking penicillin prophylaxis.
Oral health is very important in these patients and patients should receive education about dental care.
Patients with carditis should be encouraged to inform their doctor or dentist prior to any interventional
procedure so appropriate antibiotic prophylaxis against infective endocarditis can be given.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Rheumatic fever Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Monitoring
Monitoring
Most patients respond well to treatment and can be discharged from hospital within 2 weeks. Patients with
progressive or severe carditis often require a longer admission with careful monitoring of clinical condition
based on clinical examination, serial echocardiography, ECG, and chest x-ray.
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein should be measured weekly initially, and then
every 1 to 2 weeks until they normalize, when possible. Echocardiography should be repeated after 2-4
weeks if the initial diagnosis is unclear or if the initial episode was severe.
All patients who have had carditis should be seen in follow-up by their primary medical practitioner at 6-
monthly intervals and by a specialist cardiologist with echocardiography every 1 to 2 years. If moderate
to severe rheumatic valve disease is present, more frequent review is advised. The importance of
prophylaxis can be emphasized at follow-up. Patients with valvular involvement will need a full dental
assessment, prior to elective valve surgery.
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
rheumatic heart disease long term high
Around 30% to 50% of all patients with rheumatic fever will develop rheumatic heart disease, and this
risk increases to more than 70% if the initial attack is severe or if there has been at least one recurrence.
Typically this affects the mitral valve, but mixed aortic and mitral disease can occur. This may be detected
through routine follow-up or if the patient develops symptoms of breathlessness or decreased exercise
tolerance. The extent of valve damage can be monitored by echocardiography, and valve repair or
replacement surgery may be required. Mitral valve repair is preferred to replacement as patients are young
and a replacement tissue valve is only likely to last up to 15 years. The alternative is a mechanical valve
requiring lifelong anticoagulation. Additional complications include atrial fibrillation and congestive heart
failure.[121]
Prognosis
Acute recovery without treatment
Without treatment, the symptoms of acute rheumatic fever (ARF) usually resolve within several weeks, but
unrecognized cardiac inflammation can last weeks to months and progress to rheumatic heart disease
(RHD).
Acute recovery with treatment
With treatment, the symptoms of ARF usually resolve within several weeks, but cardiac inflammation
lasts weeks to months. It is not uncommon for patients to have recurrent symptoms early after the first
attack, particularly as they are weaned away from nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication, salicylates,
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Rheumatic fever Follow up
or glucocorticoids; this may include return of arthritis or arthralgia, with fever and elevated inflammatory
markers. This does not indicate a recurrence, and can be managed with reinstitution of anti-inflammatory
medication from which patients can be weaned at a slower pace.
Long-term sequelae
Patients with ARF should expect to make a complete recovery from the arthritis, fever, and chorea. Patients
should be warned that, in the long term, they are at risk of repeated episodes of ARF and consequently of
chronic RHD. The likelihood of developing RHD depends upon the severity of the initial attack of ARF and
the number of recurrent episodes of rheumatic fever.[113] Around 30% to 50% of all patients with rheumatic
fever will develop chronic RHD, and this risk increases to more than 70% if the initial attack is severe or if
there has been at least one recurrence. Therefore, secondary prophylaxis to prevent recurrent attacks is
very important, particularly as 75% of recurrences occur within 2 years of the first attack and more than 90%
occur within the first 5 years. A first attack not involving the heart does not necessarily mean that subsequent
attacks will also spare the heart.[64] The proportion of patients with a primary episode of ARF that develop
a recurrence varies depending upon adherence with secondary prophylaxis; in areas where compliance is
poor, up to 45% of cases of rheumatic fever are recurrent episodes. Conversely, in populations with excellent
secondary prophylaxis delivery and adherence, recurrence rates are very low.[120]
Intramuscular penicillin G benzathine reduces streptococcal pharyngitis by 71% to 91% and reduces
recurrent rheumatic fever by 87% to 96%.[114] Secondary prophylaxis can reduce the clinical severity
and mortality of RHD and lead to regression of RHD by about 50% to 70% if patients are adherent over a
decade.[111] [112]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Rheumatic fever Guidelines
GUIDELINES
Diagnostic guidelines
International
Recommendations for the use of echocardiography in the evaluation
of rheumatic heart disease: a report from the American Society of
Echocardiography (https://www.asecho.org/guidelines-search)   [93]
Published by: American Society of Echocardiography Last published: 2023
Revision of the Jones criteria for the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever
in the era of Doppler echocardiography (https://professional.heart.org/en/
guidelines-and-statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [2]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2015
Prevention of rheumatic fever and diagnosis and treatment of acute
streptococcal pharyngitis (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-
statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [49]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2009
Criteria for echocardiographic diagnosis of rheumatic heart disease (https://
www.nature.com/articles/nrcardio.2012.7)   [58]
Published by: World Heart Federation Last published: 2012
Rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease (https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/42898)   [1]
Published by: World Health Organization Last published: 2004
Australian guideline for prevention, diagnosis and management
of acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease (https://
www.rhdaustralia.org.au/arf-rhd-guideline)   [63]
Published by: RHDAustralia Last published: 2022
New Zealand guidelines for rheumatic fever: group A streptococcal sore
throat management guideline: update (https://www.heartfoundation.org.nz/
resources)   [94]
Published by: Heart Foundation of New Zealand Last published: 2019
Guidelines for rheumatic fever: diagnosis, management and secondary
prevention of acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease (https://
www.heartfoundation.org.nz/resources)   [95]
Published by: Heart Foundation of New Zealand Last published: 2014
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Rheumatic fever Guidelines
Treatment guidelines
International
Prevention of rheumatic fever and diagnosis and treatment of acute
streptococcal pharyngitis (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-
statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [49]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2009
Rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease (https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/42898)   [1]
Published by: World Health Organization Last published: 2004
Guidelines for the secondary prevention of rheumatic heart disease (http://
www.spids.org.sa/resources)   [118]
Published by: Saudi Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society Last published: 2017
Consensus guidelines on pediatric acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic
heart disease (https://www.indianpediatrics.net/july2008/current.htm)   [117]
Published by: Working Group on Pediatric Acute Rheumatic Fever;
Cardiology Chapter of the Indian Academy of Pediatrics
Last published: 2008
Australian guideline for prevention, diagnosis and management
of acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease (https://
www.rhdaustralia.org.au/arf-rhd-guideline)   [63]
Published by: RHDAustralia Last published: 2022
New Zealand guidelines for rheumatic fever: group A streptococcal sore
throat management guideline: update (https://www.heartfoundation.org.nz/
resources)   [94]
Published by: Heart Foundation of New Zealand Last published: 2019
Guidelines for rheumatic fever: diagnosis, management and secondary
prevention of acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease (https://
www.heartfoundation.org.nz/resources)   [95]
Published by: Heart Foundation of New Zealand Last published: 2014
Group A streptococcal infections: guidance and data (https://www.gov.uk/
government/collections/group-a-streptococcal-infections-guidance-and-data) 
[119]
Published by: UK Health Security Agency Last published: 2022
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Rheumatic fever Online resources
ONLINE RESOURCES
Online resources
1. Australian guideline for prevention, diagnosis and management of acute rheumatic fever and
rheumatic heart disease (https://www.rhdaustralia.org.au/arf-rhd-guideline)  (external link)
2. Heart Foundation of New Zealand: diagnosis, management and secondary prevention of acute
rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease (https://www.heartfoundation.org.nz/resources/acute-
rheumatic-fever-and-rheumatic-heart-disease-guideline)  (external link)
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Rheumatic fever References
Key articles
• World Health Organization. Rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease: report of a WHO Expert
Consultation. 2004 [internet publication].  Full text (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/42898)
• Gewitz MH, Baltimore RS, Tani LY, et al. Revision of the Jones criteria for the diagnosis of acute
rheumatic fever in the era of Doppler echocardiography: a scientific statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation. 2015 May 19;131(20):1806-18.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/
content/131/20/1806.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25908771?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Carapetis JR, Beaton A, Cunningham MW, et al. Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease.
Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 Jan 14;2:15084.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5810582)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27188830?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Denny F, Wannamaker LW, Brink WR, et al. Prevention of rheumatic fever; treatment of
preceding streptococci infection. J Am Med Assoc. 1950 May 13;143(2):151-3. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15415234?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Gerber MA, Baltimore RS, Eaton CB, et al. Prevention of rheumatic fever and diagnosis and treatment
of acute streptococcal pharyngitis: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association
Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular
Disease in the Young, the Interdisciplinary Council on Functional Genomics and Translational
Biology, and the Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research: endorsed
by the American Academy of Pediatrics. Circulation. 2009 Mar 24;119(11):1541-51.  Full text
(http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/119/11/1541.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19246689?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• RHDAustralia (ARF/RHD writing group). The 2020 Australian guideline for prevention, diagnosis and
management of acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease (3.2 edition, March 2022). 2022
[internet publication].  Full text (https://www.rhdaustralia.org.au/arf-rhd-guideline)
• Heart Foundation of New Zealand. New Zealand guidelines for rheumatic fever: diagnosis,
management and secondary prevention of acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease: 2014
update. 2014 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.heartfoundation.org.nz/resources/acute-
rheumatic-fever-and-rheumatic-heart-disease-guideline)
• Manyemba J, Mayosi BM. Penicillin for secondary prevention of rheumatic fever. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2002;(3):CD002227.  Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/
doi/10.1002/14651858.CD002227/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12137650?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Rheumatic fever References
REFERENCES
1. World Health Organization. Rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease: report of a WHO Expert
Consultation. 2004 [internet publication].  Full text (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/42898)
2. Gewitz MH, Baltimore RS, Tani LY, et al. Revision of the Jones criteria for the diagnosis of acute
rheumatic fever in the era of Doppler echocardiography: a scientific statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation. 2015 May 19;131(20):1806-18.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/
content/131/20/1806.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25908771?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Punukollu M, Mushet N, Linney M, et al. Neuropsychiatric manifestations of Sydenham's
chorea: a systematic review. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2016 Jan;58(1):16-28.  Full text (http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/dmcn.12786/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25926089?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Carapetis JR, Steer AC, Mulholland EK, et al. The global burden of group A streptococcal diseases.
Lancet Infect Dis. 2005 Nov;5(11):685-94. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16253886?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Watkins DA, Johnson CO, Colquhoun SM, et al. Global, regional, and national burden of
rheumatic heart disease, 1990-2015. N Engl J Med. 2017 Aug 24;377(8):713-22.  Full text (http://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1603693#t=article)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28834488?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. Roth GA, Mensah GA, Johnson CO, et al. Global burden of cardiovascular diseases and risk factors,
1990-2019: update from the GBD 2019 study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020 Dec 22;76(25):2982-3021. 
Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109720377755)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33309175?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Miyake CY, Gauvreau K, Tani LY, et al. Characteristics of children discharged from hospitals in the
United States in 2000 with the diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever. Pediatrics. 2007 Sep;120(3):503-8.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17766522?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Milne RJ, Lennon DR, Stewart JM, et al. Incidence of acute rheumatic fever in New Zealand children
and youth. J Paediatr Child Health. 2012 Aug;48(8):685-91. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22494483?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Okello E, Ndagire E, Atala J, et al. Active case finding for rheumatic fever in an endemic country.
J Am Heart Assoc. 2020 Aug 4;9(15):e016053.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/
full/10.1161/JAHA.120.016053)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32750303?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Quinn RW. Comprehensive review of morbidity and mortality trends for rheumatic fever, streptococcal
disease, and scarlet fever: the decline of rheumatic fever. Rev Infect Dis. 1989 Nov-Dec;11(6):928-53.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2690288?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Veasy LG, Tani LY, Hill HR. Persistence of acute rheumatic fever in the intermountain area
of the United States. J Pediatr. 1994 Jan;124(1):9-16. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7802743?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Rheumatic fever References
12. Veasy LG, Wiedmeier SE, Orsmond GS, et al. Resurgence of acute rheumatic fever in the
intermountain area of the United States. N Engl J Med. 1987 Feb 19;316(8):421-7. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3807984?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Johnson DR, Stevens DL, Kaplan EL. Epidemiologic analysis of group A streptococcal serotypes
associated with severe systemic infections, rheumatic fever, or uncomplicated pharyngitis. J
Infect Dis. 1992 Aug;166(2):374-82. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1634809?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Group A streptococcal disease. Acute rheumatic fever.
Jun 2022 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.cdc.gov/groupastrep/diseases-hcp/acute-
rheumatic-fever.html)
15. Carapetis JR, Currie BJ, Mathews JD. Cumulative incidence of rheumatic fever in an endemic region:
a guide to the susceptibility of the population? Epidemiol Infect. 2000 Apr;124(2):239-44.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2810907)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10813149?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Wilson MG, Schweitzer MD, Lubschez R. The familial epidemiology of rheumatic fever: genetic and
epidemiologic studies. J Peds. 1943;22:468-92.
17. Engel ME, Stander R, Vogel J, et al. Genetic susceptibility to acute rheumatic fever: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of twin studies. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25326.  Full text
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3184125/?tool=pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21980428?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Harel L, Zeharia A, Kodman Y, et al. Presence of the d8/17 B-cell marker in children with
rheumatic fever in Israel. Clin Genet. 2002 Apr;61(4):293-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12030895?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Harrington Z, Visvanathan K, Skinner NA, et al. B-cell antigen D8/17 is a marker of rheumatic fever
susceptibility in Aboriginal Australians and can be tested in remote settings. Med J Aust. 2006 May
15;184(10):507-10.  Full text (http://www.mja.com.au/public/issues/184_10_150506/har10968_fm.html)
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16719750?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Khanna AK, Buskirk DR, Williams RC Jr, et al. Presence of a non-HLA B cell antigen in
rheumatic fever patients and their families as defined by a monoclonal antibody. J Clin Invest.
1989 May;83(5):1710-6.  Full text (http://www.jci.org/articles/view/114071)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2785121?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Weisz JL, McMahon WM, Moore JC, et al. D8/17 and CD19 expression on lymphocytes of patients
with acute rheumatic fever and Tourette's disorder. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2004 Mar;11(2):330-6. 
Full text (http://cvi.asm.org/cgi/content/full/11/2/330?view=long&pmid=15013984)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15013984?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Chun LT, Reddy DV, Yamamoto LG. Rheumatic fever in children and adolescents in Hawaii.
Pediatrics. 1987 Apr;79(4):549-52. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3822672?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Rheumatic fever References
REFERENCES
23. Chun LT, Reddy V, Rhoads GG. Occurrence and prevention of rheumatic fever among ethnic
groups of Hawaii. Am J Dis Child. 1984 May;138(5):476-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/6711504?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Pearce N, Pomare E, Marshall S, et al. Mortality and social class in Maori and nonMaori New Zealand
men: changes between 1975-7 and 1985-7. N Z Med J. 1993 May 26;106(956):193-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8341437?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Carapetis JR, Wolff DR, Currie BJ. Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease in the
top end of Australia's Northern Territory. Med J Aust. 1996 Feb 5;164(3):146-9. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8628132?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Parks T, Mirabel MM, Kado J, et al; Pacific Islands Rheumatic Heart Disease Genetics Network.
Association between a common immunoglobulin heavy chain allele and rheumatic heart disease risk
in Oceania. Nat Commun. 2017 May 11;8:14946.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5437274)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28492228?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Gray LA, D'Antoine HA, Tong SYC, et al. Genome-wide analysis of genetic risk factors for rheumatic
heart disease in Aboriginal Australians provides support for pathogenic molecular mimicry. J Infect
Dis. 2017 Dec 12;216(11):1460-70. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29029143?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Machipisa T, Chong M, Muhamed B, et al. Association of novel locus with rheumatic heart disease in
black African individuals: findings from the RHDGen study. JAMA Cardiol. 2021 Sep 1;6(9):1000-11. 
Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamacardiology/fullarticle/2780387)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34106200?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. McDonald M, Currie BJ, Carapetis JR. Acute rheumatic fever: a chink in the chain that links the
heart to the throat? Lancet Infect Dis. 2004 Apr;4(4):240-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15050943?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Oliver J, Bennett J, Thomas S, et al. Preceding group A streptococcus skin and throat infections are
individually associated with acute rheumatic fever: evidence from New Zealand. BMJ Glob Health.
2021 Dec;6(12):e007038.  Full text (https://gh.bmj.com/content/6/12/e007038.long)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34887304?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Guilherme L, Kalil J, Cunningham M. Molecular mimicry in the autoimmune pathogenesis of
rheumatic heart disease. Autoimmunity. 2006 Feb;39(1):31-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16455580?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Carapetis JR, Beaton A, Cunningham MW, et al. Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease.
Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 Jan 14;2:15084.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5810582)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27188830?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Galvin JE, Hemric ME, Ward K, et al. Cytotoxic mAb from rheumatic carditis recognizes heart valves
and laminin. J Clin Invest. 2000 Jul;106(2):217-24.  Full text (http://www.jci.org/articles/view/7132)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10903337?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Rheumatic fever References
34. Martin WJ, Steer AC, Smeesters PR, et al. Post-infectious group A streptococcal autoimmune
syndromes and the heart. Autoimmun Rev. 2015 Aug;14(8):710-25. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25891492?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Kumar V, Fausto N, Abbas A. Robbins & Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA:
Saunders; 2004.
36. Coffey PM, Ralph AP, Krause VL. The role of social determinants of health in the risk and
prevention of group A streptococcal infection, acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart
disease: A systematic review. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2018 Jun;12(6):e0006577.  Full text
(https://www.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0006577)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/29897915?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Kumar P, Garhwal S, Chaudhary V. Rheumatic heart disease: a school survey in a rural area
of Rajasthan. Indian Heart J. 1992 Jul-Aug;44(4):245-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/1289223?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Jaine R, Baker M, Venugopal K. Acute rheumatic fever associated with household crowding in a
developed country. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2011 Apr;30(4):315-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20948456?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Steer AC, Carapetis JR, Nolan TM, et al. Systematic review of rheumatic heart disease prevalence
in children in developing countries: the role of environmental factors. J Paediatr Child Health. 2002
Jun;38(3):229-3. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12047688?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Wannamaker LW. The epidemiology of streptococcal infections. In: McCarty M, ed. Streptococcal
infections. New York: Columbia University Press; 1954.
41. Taranta A, Torodsag S, Metrakoset, et al. Rheumatic fever in monozygotic and dizygotic twins.
Circulation. 1959;20:778.
42. Guedez Y, Kotby A, El-Demellawy M, et al. HLA class II associations with rheumatic heart disease
are more evident and consistent among clinically homogeneous patients. Circulation. 1999 Jun
1;99(21):2784-90.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/99/21/2784)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10351973?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Azevedo PM, Merriman TR, Topless RK, et al. Association study involving polymorphisms in
IL-6, IL-1RA, and CTLA4 genes and rheumatic heart disease in New Zealand population of
Māori and Pacific ancestry. Cytokine. 2016 Sep;85:201-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/27400406?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Salie MT, Yang J, Ramírez Medina CR, et al. Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry
in severe rheumatic heart disease (RHD) identifies a proteomic signature showing ongoing
inflammation and effectively classifying RHD cases. Clin Proteomics. 2022 Mar 22;19(1):7.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8939134)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35317720?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Kemeny E, Husby GW, Williams RC Jr, et al. Tissue distribution of antigen(s) defined by monoclonal
antibody D8/17 reacting with B lymphocytes of patients with rheumatic heart disease. Clin Immunol
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Rheumatic fever References
REFERENCES
Immunopathol. 1994 Jul;72(1):35-43. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8020192?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Kaur S, Kumar D, Grover A, et al. Ethnic differences in expression of susceptibility marker(s) in
rheumatic fever/rheumatic heart disease patients. Int J Cardiol. 1998 Mar 13;64(1):9-14. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9579811?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Spinks A, Glasziou PP, Del Mar CB. Antibiotics for treatment of sore throat in children and adults.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021 Dec 9;(12):CD000023.  Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/
cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD000023.pub5/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/34881426?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Denny F, Wannamaker LW, Brink WR, et al. Prevention of rheumatic fever; treatment of
preceding streptococci infection. J Am Med Assoc. 1950 May 13;143(2):151-3. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15415234?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Gerber MA, Baltimore RS, Eaton CB, et al. Prevention of rheumatic fever and diagnosis and treatment
of acute streptococcal pharyngitis: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association
Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular
Disease in the Young, the Interdisciplinary Council on Functional Genomics and Translational
Biology, and the Interdisciplinary Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research: endorsed
by the American Academy of Pediatrics. Circulation. 2009 Mar 24;119(11):1541-51.  Full text
(http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/119/11/1541.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19246689?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Altamimi S, Khalil A, Khalaiwi KA, et al. Short-term late-generation antibiotics versus
longer term penicillin for acute streptococcal pharyngitis in children. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2012 Aug 15;(8):CD004872.  Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/
doi/10.1002/14651858.CD004872.pub3/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22895944?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Lennon D, Kerdemelidis M, Arroll B. Meta-analysis of trials of streptococcal throat treatment
programs to prevent rheumatic fever. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2009 Jul;28(7):e259-64. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19561421?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Lennon D, Stewart J, Farrell E, et al. School-based prevention of acute rheumatic fever: a group
randomized trial in New Zealand. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2009 Sep;28(9):787-94. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19710585?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Health New Zealand. Rheumatic fever guidance [internet publication].  Full text (https://
www.tewhatuora.govt.nz/for-the-health-sector/health-sector-guidance/rheumatic-fever-guidance)
54. Lennon D, Anderson P, Kerdemelidis M, et al. First presentation acute rheumatic fever is preventable
in a community setting: a school-based intervention. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2017 Dec;36(12):1113-8.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28230706?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Carapetis J, Steer A. Prevention of rheumatic fever. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2010 Jan;29(1):91-2;author
reply 92. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20035211?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Rheumatic fever References
56. Coates MM, Sliwa K, Watkins DA, et al. An investment case for the prevention and management
of rheumatic heart disease in the African Union 2021-30: a modelling study. Lancet Glob
Health. 2021 Jul;9(7):e957-66.  Full text (https://www.thelancet.com/journals/langlo/article/
PIIS2214-109X(21)00199-6/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33984296?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Jones TD. The diagnosis of rheumatic fever. J Am Med Assoc. 1944;126:481-4.
58. Reményi B, Wilson N, Steer A, et al. World Heart Federation criteria for echocardiographic
diagnosis of rheumatic heart disease - an evidence-based guideline. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2012 Feb
28;9(5):297-309.  Full text (https://www.world-heart-federation.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/
WHFechoCriteriaForDxRHDnrcardio.2012.7.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22371105?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Vasan RS, Shrivastava S, Vijayakumar M, et al. Echocardiographic evaluation of patients with
acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic carditis. Circulation. 1996 Jul 1;94(1):73-82.  Full text (http://
circ.ahajournals.org/content/94/1/73.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8964121?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Steer AC, Kado J, Jenney AW, et al. Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease in Fiji:
prospective surveillance, 2005-2007. Med J Aust. 2009 Feb 2;190(3):133-5. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19203310?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Feinstein AR, Spagnuolo M, Wood HF, et al. Rheumatic fever in children and adolescents. A
long-term epidemiologic study of subsequent prophylaxis, streptococcal infections, and clinical
sequelae. VI. Clinical features of streptococcal infections and rheumatic recurrences. Ann Intern
Med. 1964 Feb;60(suppl 5):68-86. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14118549?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Carapetis JR, Currie BJ. Rheumatic chorea in northern Australia: a clinical and epidemiological study.
Arch Dis Child. 1999 Apr;80(4):353-8.  Full text (http://adc.bmj.com/content/80/4/353.long)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10086943?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. RHDAustralia (ARF/RHD writing group). The 2020 Australian guideline for prevention, diagnosis and
management of acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease (3.2 edition, March 2022). 2022
[internet publication].  Full text (https://www.rhdaustralia.org.au/arf-rhd-guideline)
64. Carapetis JR, Currie BJ. Rheumatic fever in a high incidence population: the importance of
monoarthritis and low grade fever. Arch Dis Child. 2001 Sep;85(3):223-7.  Full text (https://
adc.bmj.com/content/85/3/223.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11517105?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
65. Veasy LG. Time to take soundings in acute rheumatic fever. Lancet. 2001 Jun 23;357(9273):1994-5.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11438128?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
66. Narula J, Kaplan EL. Echocardiographic diagnosis of rheumatic fever. Lancet. 2001
Dec 8;358(9297):2000. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11747959?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Rheumatic fever References
REFERENCES
67. Abernethy M, Bass N, Sharpe N, et al. Doppler echocardiography and the early diagnosis of carditis in
acute rheumatic fever. Aust N Z J Med. 1994 Oct;24(5):530-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7848157?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
68. Vijayalakshmi IB, Vishnuprabhu RO, Chitra N, et al. The efficacy of echocardiographic criterions for the
diagnosis of carditis in acute rheumatic fever. Cardiol Young. 2008 Dec;18(6):586-92. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18845020?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
69. Martin DR, Voss LM, Walker SJ, et al. Acute rheumatic fever in Auckland, New Zealand: spectrum of
associated group A streptococci different from expected. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1994 Apr;13(4):264-9.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8036041?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
70. Upton A, Lowe C, Stewart J, et al. In vitro comparison of four rapid antigen tests for group
A streptococcus detection. N Z Med J. 2014 Jul 18;127(1398):77-83. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25146863?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
71. Cohen JF, Bertille N, Cohen R, et al. Rapid antigen detection test for group A streptococcus in
children with pharyngitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Jul 4;7:CD010502.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD010502.pub2/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27374000?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
72. Wang F, Tian Y, Chen L, et al. Accurate detection of Streptococcus pyogenes at the point of care using
the Cobas Liat Strep A nucleic acid test. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2017 Oct;56(12):1128-34. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28006981?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
73. Parker KG, Gandra S, Matushek S, et al. Comparison of 3 nucleic acid amplification tests and a rapid
antigen test with culture for the detection of group A streptococci from throat swabs. J Appl Lab Med.
2019 Sep;4(2):164-9.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/jalm/article/4/2/164/5636909)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31639661?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
74. Ferrieri P, Thonen-Kerr E, Nelson K, et al. Prospective evaluation of Xpert® Xpress strep A automated
PCR assay vs. Solana® group A streptococcal nucleic acid amplification testing vs. conventional
throat culture. Curr Microbiol. 2021 Aug;78(8):2956-60.  Full text (https://link.springer.com/
article/10.1007/s00284-021-02547-0)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34085100?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
75. Barth DD, Cinanni G, Carapetis JR, et al. Roadmap to incorporating group A Streptococcus molecular
point-of-care testing for remote Australia: a key activity to eliminate rheumatic heart disease. Med
J Aust. 2022 Aug 28 [Epub ahead of print].  Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.5694/
mja2.51692)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36030483?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
76. Simundic AM, Bölenius K, Cadamuro J, et al. Joint EFLM-COLABIOCLI recommendation for venous
blood sampling. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2018;56(12):2015-38. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/30004902?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
77. Gentles TL, Colan SD, Wilson NJ, et al. Left ventricular mechanics during and after acute rheumatic
fever: contractile dysfunction is closely related to valve regurgitation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Rheumatic fever References
Jan;37(1):201-7.  Full text (http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0735109700010585?via
%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11153739?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
78. Tubridy-Clark M, Carapetis JR. Subclinical carditis in rheumatic fever: a systematic review. Int
J Cardiol. 2007 Jun 25;119(1):54-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17034886?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
79. Wilson NJ, Neutze JM. Echocardiographic diagnosis of subclinical carditis in acute rheumatic
fever. Int J Cardiol. 1995 Jun 2;50(1):1-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7558460?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
80. Upton A, Farrell E, Stewart J, e al. Disappointing performance of rapid antigen detection tests
for group A streptococcus in the Auckland school-based sore throat programme. N Z Med
J. 2014 Feb 14;127(1389):103-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24548967?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
81. Kaplan EL, Rothermel CD, Johnson DR. Antistreptolysin O and anti-deoxyribonuclease B titers: normal
values for children ages 2 to 12 in the United States. Pediatrics. 1998 Jan;101(1 Pt 1):86-8. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9417157?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
82. Danchin MH, Carlin JB, Devenish W, et al. New normal ranges of antistreptolysin O and anti-
deoxyribonuclease B titres for Australian children. J Paediatr Child Health. 2005 Nov;41(11):583-6.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16398843?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
83. American Heart Association. Guidelines for the diagnosis of rheumatic fever. Jones Criteria, 1992
update. Special Writing Group of the Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki
Disease of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young of the American Heart Association.
JAMA. 1992 Oct 21;268(15):2069-73. [Erratum in: JAMA. 1993 Jan 27;269(4):476.] Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1404745?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
84. Rutstein DD. Report of the committee on standards and criteria for programs of care of the council
of rheumatic fever and congenital heart disease of the American Heart Association: Jones criteria
(modified) for guidance in the diagnosis of rheumatic fever. Circulation. 1956 Apr;13(4):617-20. 
Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/13/4/617.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/13356420?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
85. Stollerman GH, Markowitz M, Taranta A, et al. Committee report: Jones criteria (revised) for
guidance in the diagnosis of rheumatic fever. Circulation. 1965 Oct;32(4):664-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/5825556?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
86. Committee of rheumatic fever and bacterial endocarditis of the American Heart Association: Jones
criteria (revised) for guidance in the diagnosis of rheumatic fever. Circulation. 1984 Jan;69(1):204A-8A.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6357537?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
87. Carapetis JR. Rheumatic heart disease in developing countries. N Engl J Med. 2007 Aug
2;357(5):439-41. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17671252?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Rheumatic fever References
REFERENCES
88. WHO global programme for the prevention of rheumatic fever/rheumatic heart disease in sixteen
developing countries (AGFUND supported). Meeting of national programme managers. 4-6 November,
1986. Geneva: World Health Organisation; 1987. Report No.: WHO/CVD/87.1.
89. Marijon E, Ou P, Celermajer DS, et al. Prevelance of rheumatic heart disease detected by
echocardiographic screening. N Engl J Med. 2007 Aug 2;357(5):470-6.  Full text (http://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa065085#t=article)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17671255?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
90. Rothenbühler M, O'Sullivan CJ, Stortecky S, et al. Active surveillance for rheumatic heart disease
in endemic regions: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prevalence among children and
adolescents. Lancet Glob Health. 2014 Dec;2(12):e717-26.  Full text (http://www.thelancet.com/
journals/langlo/article/PIIS2214-109X(14)70310-9/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/25433627?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
91. Beaton A, Okello E, Rwebembera J, et al. Secondary antibiotic prophylaxis for latent rheumatic
heart disease. N Engl J Med. 2022 Jan 20;386(3):230-40.  Full text (https://www.nejm.org/
doi/10.1056/NEJMoa2102074)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34767321?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
92. Yacoub M, Mayosi B, ElGuindy A, et al. Eliminating acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic
heart disease. Lancet. 2017 Jul 15;390(10091):212-3. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28721865?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
93. Pandian NG, Kim JK, Arias-Godinez JA, et al. Recommendations for the use of echocardiography in
the evaluation of rheumatic heart disease: a report from the American Society of Echocardiography.
J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2023 Jan;36(1):3-28.  Full text (https://onlinejase.com/article/
S0894-7317(22)00521-1/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36428195?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
94. Heart Foundation of New Zealand. New Zealand guidelines for rheumatic fever: group A streptococcal
sore throat management guideline - 2019 update. 2019 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
www.heartfoundation.org.nz/resources/group-a-streptococcal-sore-throat-management)
95. Heart Foundation of New Zealand. New Zealand guidelines for rheumatic fever: diagnosis,
management and secondary prevention of acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease: 2014
update. 2014 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.heartfoundation.org.nz/resources/acute-
rheumatic-fever-and-rheumatic-heart-disease-guideline)
96. Cilliers A, Adler AJ, Saloojee H. Anti-inflammatory treatment for carditis in acute rheumatic
fever. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 May 28;(5):CD003176.  Full text (https://
www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD003176.pub3/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26017576?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
97. US Food and Drug Administration. FDA drug safety communication: FDA requires labeling changes for
prescription opioid cough and cold medicines to limit their use to adults 18 years and older. Jan 2018
[internet publication].  Full text (https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm590435.htm)
62 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 63 ===
Rheumatic fever References
98. Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. Codeine: restricted use as analgesic in
children and adolescents after European safety review. Drug Safety Update. 2013;6:S1.  Full text
(http://www.mhra.gov.uk/Safetyinformation/DrugSafetyUpdate/CON287006)
99. European Medicines Agency. Restrictions on use of codeine for pain relief in children
- CMDh endorses PRAC recommendation. Jun 2013 [internet publication].  Full text
(http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/news_and_events/news/2013/06/
news_detail_001829.jsp&mid=WC0b01ac058004d5c1)
100. Mortimer EA Jr, Vaisman S, Vigneau A, et al. The effect of penicillin on acute rheumatic
fever and valvular heart disease. N Engl J Med. 1959 Jan 15;260(3):101-12. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13622930?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
101. Illingworth RS, Lorber J, Holt KS, et al. Acute rheumatic fever in children: a comparison of six forms of
treatment in 200 cases. Lancet. 1957 Oct 5;273(6997):653-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/13476677?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
102. Bywaters EG, Thomas GT. Bed rest, salicylates, and steroid in rheumatic fever. Br Med J. 1961 Jun
10;1(5240):1628-34.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1954279)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13689614?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
103. Dorfman A, Gross JI, Lorincz AE. The treatment of acute rheumatic fever. Pediatrics. 1961
May;27:692-706. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13723875?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
104. Çetin İİ, Ekici F, Kocabaş A, et al. The efficacy and safety of naproxen in acute rheumatic
fever: The comparative results of 11-year experience with acetylsalicylic acid and naproxen.
Turk J Pediatr. 2016;58(5):473-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28621087?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
105. Hashkes PJ, Tauber T, Somekh E, et al; Pediatric Rheumatlogy Study Group of Israel. Naproxen
as an alternative to aspirin for the treatment of arthritis of rheumatic fever: a randomized trial. J
Pediatr. 2003 Sep;143(3):399-401. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14517527?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
106. Albert DA, Harel L, Karrison T. The treatment of rheumatic carditis: a review and meta-analysis.
Medicine (Baltimore). 1995 Jan;74(1):1-12. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7837966?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
107. Voss LM, Wilson NJ, Neutze JM, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin in acute rheumatic
fever: a randomized controlled trial. Circulation. 2001 Jan 23;103(3):401-6.  Full text (http://
circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/103/3/401)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11157692?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
108. Pena J, Mora E, Cardozo J, et al. Comparison of the efficacy of carbamazepine, haloperidol
and valproic acid in the treatment of children with Sydenham's chorea: clinical follow-up of 18
patients. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2002 Jun;60(2-B):374-7.  Full text (http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?
script=sci_arttext&pid=S0004-282X2002000300006&lng=en&nrm=iso&tlng=en)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12131934?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
63
=== Page 64 ===
Rheumatic fever References
REFERENCES
109. Walker K, Brink A, Lawrenson J, et al. Treatment of sydenham chorea with intravenous
immunoglobulin. J Child Neurol. 2012 Feb;27(2):147-55. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21868369?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
110. Mohammad SS, Nosadini M, Grattan-Smith P, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin in acute Sydenham's
chorea: a systematic review. J Paediatr Child Health. 2015 Dec;51(12):1235-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26633611?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
111. Feinstein AR, Stern EK, Spagnuolo M. The prognosis of acute rheumatic fever. Am Heart J. 1964
Dec;68:817-34. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14235961?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
112. Sanyal SK, Berry AM, Duggal S, et al. Sequelae of the initial attack of acute rheumatic fever in children
from north India. A prospective 5-year follow-up study. Circulation. 1982 Feb;65(2):375-9. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7053897?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
113. Stollerman GH. Rheumatic fever and streptococcal infection. New York: Grune & Stratton; 1975.
114. Manyemba J, Mayosi BM. Penicillin for secondary prevention of rheumatic fever. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2002;(3):CD002227.  Full text (https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/
doi/10.1002/14651858.CD002227/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12137650?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
115. Sanyahumbi A, Ali S, Benjamin IJ, et al. Penicillin reactions in patients with severe rheumatic heart
disease: a presidential advisory from the American Heart Association. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022
Mar;11(5):e024517.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/JAHA.121.024517)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35049336?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
116. Karthikeyan G, Devasenapathy N, Zühlke L, et al. Digoxin and clinical outcomes in the
Global Rheumatic Heart Disease Registry. Heart. 2019 Mar;105(5):363-69. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30209123?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
117. Working Group on Pediatric Acute Rheumatic Fever and Cardiology Chapter of Indian Academy
of Pediatrics, Saxena A, Kumar RK, et al. Consensus guidelines on pediatric acute rheumatic
fever and rheumatic heart disease. Indian Pediatr. 2008 Jul;45(7):565-73.  Full text (http://
www.indianpediatrics.net/july2008/565.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18695275?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
118. Al-Jazairi A, Al-Jaser R, Al-Halees Z, et al. Guidelines for the secondary prevention of rheumatic
heart disease: Endorsed by Saudi Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (SPIDS). Int J Pediatr
Adolesc Med. 2017 Mar;4(1):47-50.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2352646717300327)
119. UK Health Security Agency. Group A streptococcal infections: guidance and data. 2022 [internet
publication].  Full text (https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/group-a-streptococcal-infections-
guidance-and-data)
64 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 65 ===
Rheumatic fever References
120. Spinetto H, Lennon D, Horsburgh M. Rheumatic fever recurrence prevention: a nurse-led programme
of 28-day penicillin in an area of high endemnicity. J Paediatr Child Health. 2011 Apr;47(4):228-34.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21470327?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
121. Kumar RK, Antunes MJ, Beaton A, et al. Contemporary diagnosis and management of rheumatic
heart disease: implications for closing the gap: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2020 Nov 17;142(20):e337-57.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000921)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33073615?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
122. Tompkins DG, Boxerbaum B, Liebman J. Long-term prognosis of rheumatic fever patients receiving
regular intramuscular benzathine penicillin. Circulation. 1972 Mar;45(3):543-51.  Full text (http://
circ.ahajournals.org/content/45/3/543.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/5012243?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
123. Tompkins RK, Burnes DC, Cable WE. An analysis of the cost-effectiveness of pharyngitis
management and acute rheumatic fever prevention. Ann Intern Med. 1977 Apr;86(4):481-92. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/403842?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
124. Dajani A, Taubert K, Ferrieri P, et al. Treatment of acute streptococcal pharyngitis and prevention of
rheumatic fever: a statement for health professionals. Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis,
and Kawasaki Disease of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, the American
Heart Association. Pediatrics. 1995 Oct;96(4 Pt 1):758-64. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7567345?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
125. Lue HC, Wu MH, Hsieh KH, et al, Rheumatic fever recurrences: controlled study of 3-week versus 4-
week benzathine penicillin prevention programs. J Pediatr. 1986 Feb;108(2):299-304. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3511209?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
126. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Prophylaxis against infective endocarditis:
antimicrobial prophylaxis against infective endocarditis in adults and children undergoing interventional
procedures. Jul 2016 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg64)
127. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of
patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021 Feb
2;143(5):e72-227.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000923)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33332150?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
128. Baskerville CA, Hanrahan BB, Burke AJ, et al. Infective endocarditis and rheumatic heart disease in
the north of Australia. Heart Lung Circ. 2012 Jan;21(1):36-41. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21924682?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
65
=== Page 66 ===
Rheumatic fever Images
IMAGES
Images
Figure 1: Global prevalence and mortality rates. Source: data derived from Global Burden of Disease data
2010/2013.
Zühlke, L.J., Beaton, A., Engel, M.E. et al. Group A streptococcus, acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart
disease: epidemiology and clinical considerations. Curr Treat Options Cardio Med 19, 15 (2017). Used with
permission.
66 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 67 ===
Rheumatic fever Images
Figure 2: ECG showing heart block in acute rheumatic fever
Aust N Z J Med. 1996 Apr;26(2):241-2; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
67
=== Page 68 ===
Rheumatic fever Images
IMAGES
Figure 3: Chest x-ray of biventricular heart failure due to acute carditis in rheumatic fever
Lancet. 2006 Jun 24;367(9528):2118; used with permission
68 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 69 ===
Rheumatic fever Images
Figure 4: Normal values for antistreptolysin O (ASO) and anti-DNase B titers
Table compiled by contributors.
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
69
=== Page 70 ===
Rheumatic fever Images
IMAGES
Figure 5: Typical appearance of erythema marginatum on the back of a child with acute rheumatic fever
Courtesy of Professor Mike South, Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne; used with permission
70 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 71 ===
Rheumatic fever Disclaimer
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
71
=== Page 72 ===
Rheumatic fever Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
72 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 10, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 73 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Liesl Zühlke, MBChB DCH FCPaeds Cert Card (Paeds) MPH FACC FESC MSc PhD
Vice-President South African Medical Research Council - Extramural Research and Internal Portfolio
Director Children's Heart Disease Research Unit, Paediatric Cardiologist, Division of Paediatric Cardiology,
Department of Paediatrics, Red Cross Children's Hospital, Cape Heart Institute and Institute of Infectious
Diseases and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South
Africa
DISCLOSURES: LZ has been funded by the South African Medical Research Council, NRF, and through
the African Research Leader award jointly by the UK Medical Research Council (MRC) and the UK
Department for International Development (DFID) under the MRC/DFID Concordat agreement. LZ is a
board member of the World Heart Federation, the NCD Alliance, and FoodForward South Africa. LZ an
author of the UpToDate rheumatic heart disease topic. None of the above are competing interests.
John Lawrenson,
Head of Clinical Unit
Paediatric Cardiology Service of the Western Cape, Red Cross Children's and Tygerberg Hospital,
Stellenbosch University and University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa
DISCLOSURES: JL declares that he has no competing interests.
// Acknowledgements:
Professor Liesl Zühlke and Professor John Lawrenson would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Rachel
Webb, Dr Andrew C. Steer, and Dr Jonathan Carapetis, previous contributors to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: RW declares that she has no competing interests; she is an active researcher and clinician
in acute rheumatic fever/rheumatic heart disease and is a co-investigator on a (non-industry) grant funded
by the Health Research Council of New Zealand and gives educational talks and has prepared manuscripts
on rheumatic fever solely in capacity as a University of Auckland academic and Paediatric Infectious
Diseases Specialist. ACS and JC declare that they have no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Salah Zaher, MD
Professor of Pediatrics
Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Alexandria, Cardiologist, El Shatby
Children's Hospital, Alexandria, Egypt
DISCLOSURES: SZ declares that she has no competing interests.
Nigel Wilson, FRACP
Paediatric Cardiologist/Interventional Cardiologist
Paediatric and Congenital Cardiac Services, Green Lane Clinical Services, Starship Children's Hospital,
Auckland, New Zealand
DISCLOSURES: NW declares that he has no competing interests.
Andrea Summer, MD
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC
=== Page 74 ===
Contributors:
DISCLOSURES: AS declares that she has no competing interests.
