# Shock

=== Page 1 ===
Shock
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Feb 25, 2025
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Risk factors  4
Etiology  6
Pathophysiology  6
Classification  7
Case history  7
Diagnosis  9
Recommendations  9
History and exam  12
Tests  15
Differentials  19
Criteria  19
Management  21
Recommendations  21
Treatment algorithm overview  25
Treatment algorithm  26
Emerging  33
Primary prevention  33
Patient discussions  33
Follow up  34
Monitoring  34
Complications  34
Prognosis  35
Guidelines  36
Diagnostic guidelines  36
Treatment guidelines  37
Evidence tables  38
References  41
Disclaimer  51
=== Page 3 ===
Shock Overview
Summary
Shock is commonly diagnosed when signs of hypoperfusion are associated with low or declining blood
pressure.
Shock may result from a number of disease processes, including pump failure (cardiogenic), loss of
intravascular volume (hypovolemic), failure of vasoregulation (distributive), or obstruction to blood flow
(obstructive).
Initial treatment aims to optimize oxygen delivery and reverse hypoperfusion through volume resuscitation,
vasoactive agents for refractory hypotension due to vasodilation, management of cardiac dysfunction, and
treatment of the underlying cause.
Management of shock is best undertaken in a critical care environment.
Definition
Shock is most commonly defined as the life-threatening failure of adequate oxygen delivery to the tissues
and may be due to decreased blood perfusion of tissues, inadequate blood oxygen saturation, or increased
oxygen demand from the tissues that results in decreased end-organ oxygenation and dysfunction. If left
untreated, shock results in sustained multiple organ dysfunction, and damage to vital organs with possible
death. Tissue hypoperfusion may be present without systemic hypotension, but at the bedside shock is
commonly diagnosed when both are present (arterial hypotension and organ dysfunction).[1] [2] [3]
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Shock Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
Septic shock is the most common form of shock in intensive care unit patients.[5] The annual incidence of
septic shock in adults is estimated at 0.3 to 0.7 per 1000.[6] [7] [8] [9] Shock also complicates myocardial
infarction in 7% to 9% of patients (cardiogenic shock).[10] [11] [12] [13] [14] In the US, cardiogenic shock
accounts for 2% to 5% of acute heart failure presentations, with a prevalence in intensive care units of 14%
to 16%.[15] In the US, approximately 30,000 to 40,000 patients with cardiogenic shock are admitted to
hospital every year; in Europe, 70,000 to 80,000 are admitted each year.[16]
Hypovolemic shock is the most common form of shock in children worldwide, owing to the rate of diarrheal
illness in the developing world, particularly among infants.[17] Trauma, a common cause of hypovolemic
shock worldwide, is the leading cause of death in people ages 1 to 44 years in the US.[18]
Risk factors
Strong
increasing age
Advancing age is associated with a rising incidence of shock associated with sepsis and myocardial
infarction.[6] [11] This association is plausible as advancing age is associated with diminishing overall
compensatory capacity.
myocardial infarction
About 7% to 9% of patients with myocardial infarction develop shock as a complication.[10] [11] [12]
[13] [14]
cardiomyopathy
Progressive cardiomyopathy can result in cardiac failure and the development of cardiogenic shock.[4]
heart valve disease
Cardiogenic shock may result from disruption to cardiac valve function. This may follow an acute
myocardial infarction with rupture of a papillary muscle, endocarditis with valve destruction, or with
chronic dilatation/stenosis of a valve.[4]
arrhythmias
Arrhythmias can directly affect pump function by altering filling time and coordination between the atria
and ventricles. Coronary blood flow occurs during diastole, and arrhythmias can affect the time spent
in diastole and thus coronary perfusion. Alteration of stroke volume and heart rate can directly affect
blood pressure and thus the development of shock.
trauma
Trauma can cause vascular injury, long bone fractures, and/or solid-organ rupture, which may result
in hemorrhage and hypovolemic shock. Chest trauma can cause a tension pneumothorax, which can
lead to obstructive shock. Bowel perforation may result in peritonitis and secondary sepsis. Traumatic
brain injury may result in neurogenic (distributive) shock and disturbance of basic respiratory and
cardiac regulatory mechanisms.
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Shock Theory
gastrointestinal bleeding
May result in hypovolemic shock secondary to hemorrhage.
ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
A ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm often leads to concealed bleeding into the abdomen. Rapid
hypovolemic shock and death may occur unless repaired by surgery or endovascular methods.
burns/heat stroke
Extensive burns result in large fluid losses as the integrity of the skin barrier is lost. This may result in
hypovolemic shock if losses are not adequately replaced. Heat stroke may result in hypovolemia due to
sweat and other insensible losses.
gastrointestinal losses: diarrhea and vomiting
Diarrhea and vomiting may result in hypovolemic shock if the losses are not replaced.
pancreatitis
Third space losses can result in hypovolemic shock.
sepsis
The most common form of shock is septic shock. The annual incidence in adults worldwide is 0.3 to
0.7 per 1000.[6] [7] [8] [9]
anaphylaxis/poisoning
This can cause massive vasodilation and distributive shock, or inability to meet cellular oxygen
demand as seen with carbon monoxide toxicity.
spinal or brainstem injury
Spinal or brainstem injury can lead to the loss of sympathetic regulation of peripheral vasculature,
resulting in decreased systemic vascular resistance.
endocrine disease
Adrenal failure, hypopituitarism, and hypothyroidism can result in distributive shock due to the loss of
homeostatic regulation. There are few clinical signs to identify an endocrine cause of shock, but there
may be a previous history of endocrine problems, and this should be considered when other causes
are not apparent.
pulmonary embolism
Pulmonary embolism causes restriction of blood flow to the lungs, resulting in obstructive shock.
cardiac tamponade
Cardiac tamponade, particularly acute, causes restriction of ventricular filling and decreased cardiac
output. Cardiac tamponade may have one of many causes, including trauma, infection, or autoimmune
disease.
Weak
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Shock Theory
THEORY
comorbidities
Comorbidities are likely to increase the likelihood of developing shock due to the patient’s reduced
ability to compensate for stress brought on by additional disease or injury. Patients who have
undergone splenectomy have been shown to have a higher risk of infection and septic shock than
those who haven't undergone splenectomy.[22]
new medication (anaphylactic shock)
Anaphylactic shock may result from a reaction to new medication or a new formulation of an
existing medication. Newly administered beta-blocker medication can result in cardiac depression or
bradycardia with resulting pump failure.
Etiology
Any severe disease may progress to global hypoperfusion and shock. The most common causes of shock
are grouped according to their pathologic mechanism:
• Cardiogenic (pump dysfunction): this may occur after myocardial infarction, due to cardiomyopathy,
valvular abnormalities, or arrhythmias.[3] [15]
• Hypovolemic (loss of intravascular volume): due to hemorrhage (trauma, gastrointestinal), third space
losses, burns, heat stress, or gastrointestinal losses.[19] [20]
• Distributive (failure of vasoregulation): sepsis, anaphylaxis, poisoning, injury of the brainstem or spine
(neurogenic) or endocrine disease (adrenal, hypothyroid, or hypopituitarism).
• Obstructive shock (barriers to cardiac flow or filling): a pulmonary embolus may restrict pulmonary
blood flow; cardiac tamponade and tension pneumothorax cause cardiac filling restriction.
Pathophysiology
Hypoperfusion is a lack of adequate oxygen delivery at a cellular level, due to decreased blood flow and
oxygen delivery, or increased tissue oxygen demand without a homeostatic increase in blood flow to supply
the required oxygen for organ tissue. When blood flow supply cannot meet demand, hypoperfusion results.
Low oxygen delivery from poor blood flow or low blood oxygen saturation impairs basic metabolic functions of
cells and organs.
Hypoperfusion triggers a systemic stress response, including tachycardia and peripheral vasoconstriction.
Once physiologic compensation mechanisms are overwhelmed, organ dysfunction ensues, followed by organ
failure, irreversible organ damage, and death.
In septic shock, pathologic peripheral vasodilation caused by the septic state may result in a relative loss of
perfusion pressure due to loss of systemic vascular resistance (vascular regulation). This leads to secondary
coronary ischemia and cardiac dysfunction. The resulting vascular and cardiac impairment may contribute to
the progression of shock.
In cardiogenic shock, tissue hypoperfusion resulting from loss of cardiac output induces tissue (cellular)
inflammation.[21] Shock may self-perpetuate by inducing additional cellular-level shock response such as
cell-toxic cytokines, which results in systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Shock Theory
Low blood pressure is an indirect, imprecise measure of perfusion. This is illustrated by decreased cellular
oxygen delivery in hypertensive crisis, where high arterial resistance actually reduces cardiac output and
perfusion. Tissue hypoxia may be present without low blood pressure.[1]
Classification
Pathologic mechanism
Shock is most commonly classified by cause.
• Cardiogenic (pump dysfunction): may occur after myocardial infarction, due to cardiomyopathy,
arrhythmia, or cardiac valve pathology.[4]
• Hypovolemic (loss of intravascular volume): due to hemorrhage, dehydration, gastrointestinal or third
space losses.
• Distributive (failure of vasoregulation): results in a fall in systemic vascular resistance with vasodilation
and, classically, warm peripheries, as occurs in sepsis and anaphylaxis.
• Obstructive (barriers to cardiac flow or filling): a pulmonary embolus may restrict flow; cardiac
tamponade and tension pneumothorax cause a cardiac filling restriction.
Case history
Case history #1
A 72-year-old man presents with progressive malaise, weakness, and confusion. He suffers from
hypertension but this is well controlled with a thiazide diuretic and an ACE inhibitor. He has diabetes,
treated with metformin, but no other medical problems, and he is able to perform all activities of daily
living independently. The patient's wife reports general deterioration over the last 2 days. The patient
appears severely ill, weak, and obtunded, and is unable to speak. His skin is mottled and dry with cool
peripheries, and he is mildly cyanotic. Respiratory rate is 24 breaths/minute, pulse rate 94 beats/minute,
blood pressure 87/64 mmHg, and temperature 95.9°F (35.5°C). Auscultation yields coarse crackles over
both lung bases.
Case history #2
A 45-year-old man presents to the emergency department with upper abdominal pain and a history of
peptic ulcer disease. He reports vomiting blood at home. He is otherwise well, takes no medications,
and abstains from use of alcohol. While in the emergency department he vomits bright red blood into
a bedside basin and becomes light-headed. Blood pressure is 86/40 mmHg, pulse 120 bpm, and
respiratory rate 24 per minute. His skin is cool to touch, and his skin is pale and mottled.
Other presentations
Presentation of shock depends on the etiology but will usually be recognized by hypotension, decreased
urine output, and clouding of consciousness. A compensatory tachycardia may or may not be present.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Shock Theory
THEORY
Hemorrhagic shock (a form of hypovolemic shock) can occur from trauma, after surgery (drain losses
may be an indication), as hematemesis, or from rectal bleeding. This can occur rapidly. Other forms of
hypovolemic shock can result from third space losses in pancreatitis, diarrhea, and vomiting, extensive
burns, or concealed hemorrhage, such as in abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture. Obstructive shock may
present suddenly with cyanosis and respiratory distress with a tension pneumothorax, or the triad of
muffled heart sounds, low blood pressure, and jugular venous distention as classically seen in cardiac
tamponade. Septic shock is typically described as hypotension with increased cardiac output and warm
peripheries due to peripheral vasodilation and with a suspected source of infection. The patient is often
febrile. Cardiogenic shock may follow myocardial infarction, cardiomyopathy, or fulminant heart failure.[4]
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Shock Diagnosis
Recommendations
Key Recommendations
Shock is often first suspected by low or declining blood pressure and acute deterioration in other vital
signs, such as an increase in heart rate, increased respiratory rate, decrease in oxygen saturations,
reduced level of consciousness, or decreased urinary output.
Shock may also be anticipated in relation to an established diagnosis, most typically acute myocardial
infarction, severe infection, or severe hemorrhage. A patient in shock should be managed in a critical-care
setting wherever possible.
Recognizing the patient in shock
Patients in shock look ill. They often describe symptoms specific to the underlying etiology (e.g., chest
pain, shortness of breath, or abdominal pain). Altered cognition is the most sensitive and universal sign
of hypoperfusion. Agitation and distress characterize early and milder stages, whereas unresponsiveness
indicates more severe and advanced shock.[3]
Clinical signs of shock
Sustained hypoperfusion induces variable organ dysfunction, with signs dependent on the degree of
hypoperfusion, duration of episode, and ability of the patient to compensate.
The most common signs include:
• Stress responses (tachycardia, tachypnea)
• Centralization of blood by peripheral vasoconstriction (cool extremities, mottled or ashen skin, slow
capillary refill)[1] [2] [3]
• Oliguria.[1] [3]
Hypotension is usually defined as an adult systolic arterial blood pressure <90 mmHg, or a mean arterial
pressure of <65 mmHg in septic shock (sepsis with hypotension).[2] [25] A low diastolic blood pressure
suggests arterial vasodilation (such as in anaphylaxis or sepsis).[26] Direct measurement via automatic
cuff devices or an arterial line is preferred over routine sphygmomanometry, because direct blood
pressure measurement is more precise and allows for continous monitoring. If an arterial line is used, this
provides access for arterial blood sampling.[1] However, blood pressure is only an indirect measure of
perfusion. A normal blood pressure reading does not rule out shock.[1] Hypoperfusion may be present at
higher blood pressures. Sustained or severe hypoperfusion consistently leads to low blood pressure.
Narrowed pulse pressure (the difference between systolic and diastolic pressures; normally 35-45 mmHg)
suggests arterial vasoconstriction (such as occurs in cardiogenic shock or hypovolemia) and may occur
with rapid tachyarrhythmias.[26] However, pulse pressure is a function of both cardiac output and arterial
function. As cardiac output is affected by the phase of respiration, pulse pressure should be measured at
the same point in the respiratory cycle each time to enable comparison.
Hypotension in conjunction with signs of hypoperfusion is diagnostic of shock, and appropriate treatment
should be instigated. By contrast, hypotension alone, without organ dysfunction, does not require
immediate intervention, although regular review and monitoring are important.
The most useful parameters include change in cognition and deterioration in vital signs (heart rate,
respiratory rate, temperature, and oxygen saturations). Capillary refill time may be delayed, indicating
low skin perfusion, but it is not diagnostic of shock as it may be affected by age and environmental
temperature.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Heart rate and blood pressure values can be used to calculate the Shock Index (SI). SI has been
shown to be a clinically useful bedside method to estimate the level of shock and mortality in potential
hemorrhagic and infection-related shock states. SI is determined by dividing the heart rate by systolic
blood pressure. The normal range is 0.5 to 0.7; elevated SI >1.0 is associated with a need for critical care
management and potential mortality.[27]
Determining the etiology of shock: history
While all causes of shock require prompt diagnosis and management of the underlying etiology, some
require immediate treatment and must be readily identified (e.g., hemorrhage, tension pneumothorax,
cardiac tamponade, arrhythmias, and anaphylaxis).
The history often reveals valuable information to narrow down the possible causes, but treatment is a
priority in a patient with shock. In particular, ask about previous cardiac disease, medications (especially
those recently started or stopped), any existing allergies and possible exposure to allergens, existing
conditions such as abdominal aortic aneurysm, and any recent illness or hospitalization (which may
increase the risk of sepsis or pulmonary embolism).
Determining the etiology of shock: examination
Rapid assessment and treatment usually occur concurrently. Cognition, pulse rate, blood pressure, and
respiratory rate will reveal if a patient is improving or deteriorating with treatment.
Key findings on physical exam are:
• Obstructive shock: tension pneumothorax is characterized by jugular vein distention, differences
in chest excursion, resonance to percussion, decreased vocal fremitus, and absent breath sounds
in the area of the pneumothorax, as well as tracheal deviation. If strongly suspected, immediate
decompression should be performed by inserting an intravascular catheter in the second intercostal
space in the midclavicular line (or the fifth intercostal space of the anterior axillary line) on the
side of the pneumothorax and listening for the hiss of air escaping. Improvement in vital signs
should follow. Jugular vein distention in combination with muffled heart sounds and bradycardia are
characteristic of cardiac tamponade. Severe pulmonary embolism most commonly presents with
increased respiratory rate (>20 breaths/minute), hypoxia, and a sinus tachycardia; these symptoms
may be difficult to differentiate clinically from other causes of shock. 
• Cardiogenic shock: acute myocardial infarction is the most common cause of cardiogenic shock,
but clinical signs are usually nonspecific.[4] Hypotension (systolic blood pressure <90mm Hg) is the
primary clinical manifestation of shock but is not sufficient for the diagnosis.[4]
• A new or changed murmur may be heard on cardiac auscultation if a valve abnormality is present.
Typically, pulmonary edema occurs in severe cases with rales on lung auscultation and jugular vein
distention; the skin is often mottled but may be moist with diaphoresis. Cardiogenic shock due to
right ventricular failure may present with profound hypotension as a primary finding.
• Distributive shock: spinal shock is usually indicated by an initially flaccid paralysis below the level
of the lesion, with a history compatible with spinal trauma or a spinal lesion. The bladder may be
palpated due to urinary retention. A key feature of anaphylaxis may be rapid facial and tongue
swelling with airway control an urgent consideration. A widespread, itchy, erythematous rash,
sweating, and warm peripheries are common. If anaphylaxis is likely, intramuscular epinephrine
(adrenaline) is warranted. Septic shock requires evidence of infection and hypotension despite
adequate cardiac output and filling. Signs may include either fever or low body temperature,
warm peripheries, and signs specific to the site of infection. A petechial rash is characteristic for
meningococcal septicemia, but may occur also with other microbes.
• Hypovolemic shock: bleeding may be obvious (e.g., hematemesis, hematochezia, melena), or
suggested by signs of severe trauma including long bone fractures. A tender abdomen may be
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Shock Diagnosis
present with intra-abdominal bleeding (e.g., ectopic pregnancy or ruptured abdominal aortic
aneurysm). Extensive burns can account for considerable fluid losses. Septic shock also has
qualities of hypovolemic shock.
Urgent investigations
Initial investigations are to diagnose shock, monitor the effect of interventions, and narrow down the
potential etiologies. These are likely to include:
• ECG to look for signs of cardiac ischemia (ST segment deviation, abnormal Q waves or loss of R
wave, discordantly negative T waves or bundle branch block) and potentially critical arrhythmias,
especially broad complex tachycardia.[3] [15] [31]
• Complete blood count, serum chemistries, C-reactive protein, and lactate for evidence of sepsis,
acute kidney injury, and tissue hypoperfusion; blood cultures should be taken when sepsis is
suspected; elevated procalcitonin levels may help differentiate sepsis from causes of the systemic
inflammatory response syndrome.[1] [2] [3] [32]
• Focused ultrasound of the abdomen and chest to demonstrate or exclude critical bleeding (e.g.,
tamponade, free abdominal fluid, or aortic aneurysm), evaluate cardiac function and cardiac
cavity enlargement (particularly of the right ventricle in massive pulmonary embolism), assess for
pneumothorax and pulmonary consolidation, and assess the diameter and filling of the inferior vena
cava to determine vascular volume status.
• Arterial blood gas (ABG) or venous blood gas (VBG) to assess acid-base status and oxygenation
is useful in all causes of shock. The base deficit may help guide fluid resuscitation.[33] VBG is
increasingly used as it is less invasive and less painful than ABG.[34]
• Blood glucose for evidence of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia, which may be a cause or a
consequence of shock (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis).[35]
• Rapid urine pregnancy testing for women of childbearing age and pelvic ultrasound if a ruptured
ectopic pregnancy is suspected.
• Chest x-ray may offer clues to the etiology, such as a widened mediastinum in aortic disruption,
hemothorax, or a globular cardiac shadow suggestive (but not diagnostic) of cardiac tamponade.
Pneumonia can usually be confirmed by chest x-ray, but in early pneumonia or hypovolemic states
there is potential that an existing pneumonia will not be detected with conventional x-ray.
Further investigations
Additional tests can be used to identify precise etiology and may include (depending on the likely
etiology):
• Ultrasound or computed tomographic (CT) scanning
• Ultrasound can be performed at the bedside, whereas a patient must be stabilized before
attempting a transfer to a CT scanner.
• Echocardiography
• This can be performed at the bedside
• Echocardiography provides hemodynamic assessment, including cardiac output, stroke
volume, ventricular filling, left ventricular afterload, and other parameters that help in
determining the etiology of the shock state and aid in ongoing patient management.[1]
• End tidal carbon-dioxide (capnography)
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
• Side stream or direct capnography (when endotracheal airway is in place) can be helpful
in assessing pulmonary perfusion matched to ventilation. In the critical care setting,
below expected (or decreasing) end tidal carbon dioxide measured by capnography is
associated with impaired matching of pulmonary perfusion and ventilation. This may assist in
determining the presence of shock.[36] 
Central venous catheter
A central venous line can be helpful, but requires time, special equipment, and skills, as well as a certain
degree of patient stability. Central venous blood pressure and venous oxygen saturations may aid in
differentiating the shock etiology, and judging treatment efficacy.[37] One randomized controlled trial
reported that use of antibiotic- or heparin-impregnated central venous catheters reduced secondary
(iatrogenic) blood stream infections.[38]
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
altered cognition/agitation (common)
Agitation characterizes the early, milder shock stage, whereas clouded sensorium indicates more
severe shock. Also an indication of possible secondary hypoxia or hypoglycemia.
hypotension (common)
Most commonly defined as adult systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg.[2] [3] Higher blood pressure
does not rule out inadequate perfusion or early shock (e.g., systolic blood pressure <100 mmHg in
early septic shock). Direct measurement via automatic cuff devices or an arterial line is preferred
over routine sphygmomanometry, because direct blood pressure measurement is more precise and
allows for continuous monitoring. If an arterial line is used, it also provides access for arterial blood
sampling.[1]
Other diagnostic factors
tachypnea (common)
May be part of the compensatory physiologic response to increase oxygen delivery or be a symptom
of underlying etiology (e.g., tension pneumothorax or sepsis).
tachycardia (common)
A physiologic response to hypotension to try and maintain cardiac output; may be limited by cardiac
reserve or pharmacologic agents such as beta-blockers.
prolonged capillary refill time (common)
Prolonged capillary refill time is usually defined as reversal of skin blanching more than 2 to 3
seconds after releasing pressure. It indicates low skin perfusion, but is not specific to shock (it may be
prolonged with advancing age or at low temperature).
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Shock Diagnosis
oliguria (common)
A urine output <0.5 mL/kg/hour for >6 hours indicates renal hypoperfusion, and acute kidney injury
may result if left untreated.[40]
muscle weakness (common)
May be present in many shock states, and is suggestive of poor perfusion to vital organs and muscle.
cyanosis (common)
Cyanotic or mottled skin indicates low skin perfusion. As with prolonged capillary refill, this is common
in severe shock, except in distributive forms.
cool extremities (common)
Cool hands and feet indicate low peripheral perfusion, but this is not specific to shock. Cool
peripheries are common in severe shock, except in distributive forms.
evidence of trauma (common)
If shock develops in the setting of trauma: hemorrhage, tension pneumothorax, or cardiac tamponade
are to be considered.
petechial rash (common)
Classic appearance in meningococcal septicemia.
chest pain (common)
Classically present with myocardial infarction, but may also be a feature of tension pneumothorax or
trauma, or secondary to cardiac ischemia as a result of shock.
fever (uncommon)
May be present in septic shock.
abdominal pain (uncommon)
Nonspecific finding, but can be present with a ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm (classically loin
pain) or septic shock with abdominal/pelvic source. Also a sensitive symptom for ruptured ectopic
pregnancy; typically unilateral lower abdominal pain, however the patient may present with generalized
or upper abdominal pain.
jugular venous distention (uncommon)
Jugular venous distention helps differentiate between different causes of shock. Marked distention
points at pericardial tamponade, tension pneumothorax, massive pulmonary embolism, or right heart
failure.
peripheral edema (uncommon)
This is classically associated with heart failure but can also be seen in distributive shock (e.g., sepsis
and anaphylaxis) when systemic vascular resistance is lowered.
absent breath sounds on one side of chest (uncommon)
Suggestive of pneumothorax (not necessarily a tension pneumothorax).
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
tracheal deviation (uncommon)
This is a late sign of tension pneumothorax.
quiet heart sounds (uncommon)
Quiet heart sounds in conjunction with jugular venous distention and hypotension is typical of cardiac
tamponade.
flaccid paralysis of lower limbs (uncommon)
In the setting of shock, supports a neurogenic cause.
cardiac murmur (uncommon)
May indicate a heart valve abnormality.
distended bladder (uncommon)
May be found in neurogenic shock.
facial and tongue swelling (uncommon)
Angioedema is circumscribed swelling of any part of the body. Immediate treatment is warranted if this
involves the airways.
Associated with anaphylaxis.
urticarial rash (uncommon)
Widespread, itchy, erythematous rash. Associated with anaphylaxis.
pelvic pain/vaginal bleeding in woman of childbearing age (uncommon)
May indicate ruptured ectopic pregnancy.
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Shock Diagnosis
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
lactate (arterial blood gas)
High lactate is less sensitive and also less specific for shock than
commonly appreciated. Lactate levels are determined by production
rate (hypoxia, glycolysis) and clearance. High lactate indicates more
severe hypoperfusion and shock. Cut-offs for hyperlactacidemia vary:
>18 mg/dL (>2 mmol/L) is the most commonly used.[41] A low or
normal venous lactate eliminates concern for an elevated arterial
lactate.
>18 mg/dL (>2 mmol/L)
is suggestive of tissue
hypoperfusion
blood gases
Acidemia is a common finding, at least in severe shock. It may be
metabolic, due to high lactate levels and acute kidney injury, and/or
respiratory, due to hypercapnia.
Hypoxia indicates inadequate oxygen delivery, and supplemental
oxygen is required especially if <60 mmHg (<8 kPa). It is helpful to
compare with a previous result if available.
The base deficit indicates the degree of volume deficit and is
particularly useful in acute hemorrhage.
Venous blood gas is increasingly being used as it is less invasive and
less painful than arterial blood gas.[34]
arterial: pH <7.35 indicates
acidosis; PaO₂ normal or
low (normal range is 80-100
mmHg/9.3 to 13.3 kPa);
base deficit 2 to -2 mEq/L
is baseline normal; venous:
pH <7.31 indicates acidosis;
base deficit of 6 to 8 mEq/L is
baseline normal
CBC
Hemoglobin commonly underestimates the blood volume lost and a
trend is more significant than an absolute figure, unless very low.
Hb <100 g/L is suggestive of
hemorrhage as the cause;
however, may be normal
in the early stages due to
vasoconstriction; WBC may
be <4 or >12 x 10³/microliter if
sepsis is present
BUN and creatinine
May show evidence of renal impairment if kidney perfusion is
compromised.[32] [42]
may be elevated;
disproportionately raised BUN
values are seen with upper
gastrointestinal bleeding,
dehydration, or cardiac failure
serum electrolytes
Serum electrolytes should be measured at baseline and regularly
until the patient improves.[32] [43]
serum electrolytes frequently
deranged (e.g., hyperkalemia
in trauma, acute kidney injury,
and diabetic ketoacidosis;
hypokalemia with diarrhea
or vomiting; hypernatremia
in burns and diarrhea or
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
vomiting; hyponatremia in
trauma and sometimes in
diarrhea and vomiting)
coagulation studies (INR, activated PTT)
Baseline test, especially before central line placement.
may be prolonged (e.g.,
disseminated intravascular
coagulation associated with
septic shock)
blood glucose
May show hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia.[35]
may be low or high
anion gap
Assessment of the anion gap for elevated glucose to assess
for diabetic ketoacidosis. Also found with some forms of alcohol
toxicities.[44]
Anion gap is calculated by subtracting the sum of serum chloride and
bicarbonate from measured sodium concentration.[45] [46]
anion gap may be elevated
(to >10-12 mEq/L)
CRP
High CRP levels (>200 mg/L) indicate severe inflammation. The
higher the level, the greater the degree of inflammation. Lower
concentrations (<200 mg/L) may be found in septic states but also
after myocardial infarction or surgery.
high values suggest infection
and inflammation; sepsis
should be considered as a
cause
ECG
Very useful in helping to determine the etiology of shock, in particular
cardiogenic causes.[1] [3] [15] [31]
In pulmonary embolism the classic S1Q3T3 pattern of right heart
strain may be seen, but its absence does not exclude pulmonary
embolism as a cause; often only sinus tachycardia will be present.
In cardiac tamponade, low or varying QRS amplitudes may be seen.
may reveal cause of shock:
arrhythmia (ventricular or
supraventricular tachycardia,
heart block) or coronary
ischemia (ST segment
elevation, new bundle branch
block, inverted T waves); may
reveal evidence of underlying
electrolyte abnormalities (e.g.,
hypokalemia or hyperkalemia)
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Shock Diagnosis
Other tests to consider
Test Result
chest x-ray
Often helpful in determining the cause of shock (e.g., pneumonia,
aortic widening, globular heart in cardiac tamponade).[1] [3]
A chest x-ray is usually not required if a tension pneumothorax is
suspected; decompression is the first-line intervention.
can identify hemothorax,
widened mediastinum with
aortic disruption; appearance
of cardiac shadow may
suggest tamponade but is
not diagnostic; can identify
pneumonia as cause of or
associated with septic shock
focused assessment with sonography for trauma scan
Can be performed rapidly at the bedside to look for free fluid (usually
blood) around the heart (pericardial effusions) or in the abdomen
(suggestive of intra-abdominal injury). The sensitivity is operator-
dependent.
identifies free fluid in the
abdomen or pericardial
effusion
echocardiography
Useful to identify pericardial tamponade (where focused assessment
with sonography for trauma scan is not available), myocardial
depression (infarction, myocarditis), right ventricular failure (infarction,
pulmonary embolism), critical acute valve disease (endocarditis,
chordal rupture), and hypovolemia (small diameters of ventricles and
vena cava).[1] [15] [47] [48] [49] [50]
cardiac output and stroke
volume, pericardial effusion,
low left ventricular ejection
fraction, regional akinesia,
dilatation and contractility of
ventricles, valve dysfunction
procalcitonin
Elevated procalcitonin (PCT) levels have been associated with
sepsis and may help differentiate sepsis from causes of the systemic
inflammatory response syndrome.[51] [52] High PCT levels are
associated with mortality from sepsis in 90-day follow-up. Other
pro-inflammatory states, such as acute pancreatitis, trauma, major
surgery, and burns, can also increase procalcitonin.[53] Changes
in procalcitonin levels may occur later than that of lactate, although
changes in both markers combined are highly predictive of outcome
from 24 hours to 48 hours.[54] For adults with an initial diagnosis of
sepsis or septic shock and adequate source control where optimal
duration of therapy is unclear, a combination of procalcitonin and
clinical evaluation is recommended to decide when to discontinue
antimicrobials.[2] Do not perform PCT testing without an established,
evidence-based protocol.[55]
high values suggest sepsis
end tidal carbon-dioxide (capnography)
Side stream or direct capnography (when endotracheal airway is in
place) can be helpful in assessing pulmonary perfusion matched to
ventilation. In the critical care setting, below expected (or decreasing)
end tidal carbon dioxide measured by capnography is associated with
impaired matching of pulmonary perfusion and ventilation. This may
assist in determining presence of shock.[36]
can assess impaired
matching of pulmonary
perfusion and ventilation
ultrasound of thorax
Useful to identify fluid in the pleural spaces and consolidation, as well
as possible aortic root aneurysms.
may detect pleural effusions
or an aortic root aneurysm;
can identify lung consolidation
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
A dissection flap may also be seen but ultrasound has limited
sensitivity for aortic dissection and retroperitoneal bleeding. If either
of these are suspected, CT would be the investigation of choice.
consistent with heart failure or
pneumonia
ultrasound of abdomen
Useful for identifying blood in the peritoneum and abdominal aortic
aneurysms. Ultrasound can also detect the inferior vena cava (IVC)
diameter, pulsation, and collapsibility, which can be used to estimate
the overall intravascular volume; in hypovolemia the IVC diameter and
pulsation are reduced and collapsibility is increased.
A dissection flap may also be seen but ultrasound has limited
sensitivity for aortic dissection and retroperitoneal bleeding. If either
of these are suspected, CT would be the investigation of choice.
may detect abdominal aortic
aneurysm and peritoneal
blood
CT thorax, abdomen, and pelvis
CT can very efficiently identify or exclude many potential shock
etiologies, but is potentially unsafe in a hemodynamically unstable
patient. Patients must be stabilized before transfer to the imaging
suite. Very useful in trauma patients with multiple injuries.[56] [57]
may detect site of
hemorrhage, foci of infection
or infarction, pulmonary
embolism, aortic dissection,
or aneurysm
computed tomographic pulmonary angiography
Computed tomographic pulmonary angiography (CPTA) may
identify pulmonary embolism (PE), alongside other appropriate
assessment tools. CTPA is the preferred investigation tool for
definitive confirmation of PE, and is appropriate to use in most (but
not all) patients.[58] [59]
PE is confirmed by direct
visualization of the thrombus
in a pulmonary artery; it
appears as a partial or
complete intraluminal filling
defect
urinalysis and urine pregnancy test
Useful to detect signs of infection in suspected sepsis. Rapid urine
pregnancy test for women of childbearing age.
positive beta human chorionic
gonadotropin in ectopic
pregnancy; signs of infection
include blood, nitrites,
and leukocytes; ketones
may be present in diabetic
ketoacidosis or vomiting and
diarrhea
pelvic ultrasound
Useful in evaluation of possible ectopic pregnancy if urine pregnancy
test is positive.
may show ectopic or empty
uterus suggestive of ectopic
pregnancy
x-ray long bones
Fractures of the femur can cause shock due to blood loss, especially
in the elderly.
fractures of long bones
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Shock Diagnosis
Test Result
x-ray spine
Useful if there is suspicion of spinal injury in cases of neurogenic
shock.
fracture of spine
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Simple hypotension • Hypotension alone may
be entirely asymptomatic,
with the absence of signs
of hypoperfusion. With no
changes over several hours,
this excludes even mild or
early shock.
• ECG and routine laboratory
panel fail to yield significant
pathology after observation
for some hours.
Syncope or presyncope • Syncope or presyncope
differ from shock by duration
of hypoperfusion.
• Repeat blood pressure after
5 to 10 minutes is back to
normal levels.
• ECG may be done, with no
acute changes apparent.
Criteria
Shock index[60]
The shock index (SI), defined as the ratio of the heart rate (in beats per minute) to the systolic blood pressure
(in mmHg), has been shown to be a clinically useful bedside method to estimate the level of shock and
mortality in potential hemorrhagic and infection-related shock states. The normal range for SI is from 0.5
to 0.7. An SI >1.0 has been associated with significant shock and poor outcome due to circulatory failure.
Elderly age, hypertension, and current treatment with calcium-channel blockers or beta-blockers may weaken
the association of SI with shock and mortality.[60]
Sepsis screening tools
Sepsis screening tools are designed to promote the early identification of sepsis. They consist of manual
methods or automated use of the electronic health record (EHR), which includes the National Early
Warning Score (NEWS), Modified Early Warning Score (MEWS), and quick Sequential Organ Failure Score
(qSOFA) Criteria. There is wide variation in the diagnostic accuracy of these tools, but they are an important
component in the early identification of sepsis for timely intervention.[2]
Early warning scores are based on several physiologic parameters, where the greater the deviation from
normal, the higher the score. Each parameter is evaluated individually and then the final score is aggregated.
NEWS is based on the evaluation of six individual parameters, each of which is assigned a score of 0 to
3. The parameters are: respiratory rate, oxygen saturations, temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, and
level of consciousness. The aggregate NEWS2 score triggers the level of response required, including the
seniority of the clinical decision maker, the urgency of review, and the most appropriate place of care. An
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Shock Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
aggregate score of ≥7 has a significant risk of mortality, so it should prompt emergency evaluation by a
critical care specialist and transfer to a high-dependency setting for continuous monitoring of vital signs.[24]
MEWS draws on five physiologic parameters (systolic blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate,
temperature; and alert, voice, pain, unresponsive score [AVPU score]).[61] Scores of 5 or more are
associated with increased risk of death, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, and high-dependency unit
(HDU) admission. It identifies patients at risk of deterioration who require increased levels of care in the HDU
or ICU.[61]
The qSOFA uses three variables to predict death and prolonged ICU stay in patients with known or
suspected sepsis: a Glasgow Coma Score <15, a respiratory rate ≥22 breaths/minute, and a systolic blood
pressure ≤100 mmHg. When any two of these variables are present simultaneously, the patient is considered
qSOFA positive.
Studies have shown that qSOFA is more specific but less sensitive than having two of the four Systemic
Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS) Criteria for early identification of infection induced organ
dysfunction.[2] Neither SIRS nor qSOFA are ideal screening tools for sepsis and the bedside clinician should
understand the limitations of each.[2] Although the presence of a positive qSOFA should alert the clinician
to the possibility of sepsis in all resource settings, its poor sensitivity has led the Surviving Sepsis Campaign
to advise against using the qSOFA, compared with NEWS or MEWS, as a single screening tool for sepsis or
septic shock.[2]
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Shock Management
Recommendations
Key Recommendations
Treatment aims are to restore regional perfusion and improve oxygen delivery, to reverse hypotension,
and to prevent organ damage from hypoperfusion. Volume resuscitation is generally accepted as the
first-line intervention for shock, except for anaphylaxis (which requires immediate administration of
intramuscular epinephrine [adrenaline]).[63] [64] [65] Further interventions are guided by the response
to intravenous fluids and the likely etiology as investigations proceed. Evidence-based guidelines have
been published for various subtypes of shock, including septic shock and acute heart failure, but not for
the immediate management of undifferentiated shock.[2] [3] [66] [67]  Early involvement of the critical care
team is important for optimal management of the shock patient.
Airway, breathing, and circulation
As with any critically ill patient, airway patency is the first priority, and frequent reassessment is advised.
After assurance that the airway is patent, high-flow oxygen is provided as required by mask or nasal
cannula, commonly aiming for arterial oxygen saturations of 94% to 98%.[34] Routine supplementation
of oxygen to achieve higher oxygen saturations has been linked to coronary and pulmonary arterial
vasoconstriction in acute myocardial infarction.[68] [69] The goal is adequate oxygenation but not
routine excessive oxygenation. The use of positive pressure ventilation or noninvasive ventilation (NIV)
(continuous positive airway pressure and bilevel positive airway pressure) in shock resuscitation is
controversial due to NIV-induced increase in intrathoracic pressure, which may decrease cardiac preload
from the pulmonary circulation. NIV is well supported for hypoxemic respiratory failure.[70] However, the
use of NIV in the setting of shock is not well supported in the literature, and has been clinically associated
with worsening hypotension and perfusion. If NIV is used in patients with shock, rigorous monitoring
of blood pressure and perfusion of vital organs must be maintained. For patients with sepsis-induced
hypoxemic respiratory failure, high-flow nasal oxygen is recommended over NIV.[2]
Intravenous fluids aim to improve perfusion by increasing intravascular volume and preload. The benefit
outweighs the risk in the majority of cases except frank pulmonary edema. If a ruptured aortic aneurysm
is thought likely, systolic blood pressure should be maintained at no more than 100 mmHg systolic.
Commonly, systolic blood pressure of 90 mmHg or a mean arterial pressure of 65 mmHg is targeted
during volume resuscitation; infusion is stopped if concerns of volume overload develop (pulmonary
rales or suspected pulmonary edema). If there is no evidence for, or suspicion of, pulmonary edema
secondary to cardiac failure, early fluid delivery is more important than the type of fluid (crystalloid or
colloid).[71] [72] [73] [Evidence B] There is some evidence that balanced crystalloids may be preferable
to normal saline in critically ill patients in intensive care and are recommended in patients with sepsis or
septic shock.[2] [76] Fluids should be given via a large-bore peripheral intravascular catheter. If there is
acute inferior (right coronary artery) occlusion, or right ventricular infarct, hypotension is initially (before
thrombectomy) corrected with careful fluid administration to improve right ventricular filling and overall
cardiac output.[77] Blood products should be administered in patients with acute blood loss (hemorrhage)
or profound anemia from chronic red blood cell loss.[78] Caution is needed in patients with suspected
cardiogenic shock; intravenous fluids may be administered cautiously in the absence of signs of fluid
overload (clinically determined by auscultation of the lungs to assess for rales, or by chest radiography).
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Shock Management
MANAGEMENT
Monitoring
Continuous monitoring is imperative to monitor response to therapy and to guide treatment. This includes
clinical observation, repeated blood pressure readings, respiratory rate, oxygen saturations, pulse, level of
consciousness, monitoring of urine output in relation to fluid resuscitation or use of vasoactive agents, and
monitoring of cardiac rhythm. Direct blood pressure measurement via automatic cuff devices or an arterial
line is preferred over routine sphygmomanometry, because direct blood pressure measurement is more
precise and allows for continuous monitoring. If an arterial line is used, it also provides access for arterial
blood sampling.[79] Lactate levels can be monitored to assess response to treatment. In the critical care
setting, continuous capnography can aid the assessment of shock.[36] Side stream or direct capnography
(when endotracheal airway is in place) can be helpful in assessing pulmonary perfusion matched to
ventilation.[36] The lactate level will usually decrease if the patient is clinically improving.[2] Treatment is
dependent on continuous monitoring of these variables and guided by their response. Patients requiring
vasoactive drugs (vasopressor/inotrope) need continuous monitoring in a critical care setting.
Vasoactive drugs
Patients with a systolic BP <90 mmHg with critical reduction in cardiac output and end-organ
hypoperfusion are defined as being in cardiogenic shock.[4]
Short-term intravenous infusion of a vasoactive agent (vasopressor and/or inotrope) should be considered
in patients with hypotension (systolic BP <90mmHg) and/or signs or symptoms of hypoperfusion, despite
adequate filling status.[3] [4] Vasoactive agents may cause tachycardia, and induce arrhythmias and
myocardial ischemia.[3] [4]
Intravenous inotropic support can increase cardiac output and improve hemodynamics in patients
presenting with cardiogenic shock.[4] There is a lack of robust evidence to suggest the clear benefit of
one inotropic agent over another in cardiogenic shock.[80] In general, the choice of a specific inotropic
agent is guided by blood pressure, concurrent arrhythmias, and availability of drug.[4] Inotropes should
be used with caution because there is evidence that they result in increased mortality.[3] [4] [81] Inotropes
should be discontinued if there are sustained arrhythmias or symptomatic coronary ischemia. Continuous
monitoring of cardiac rhythm is recommended during infusion of inotropes.
Vasopressors are commonly recommended in hypotension refractory to volume resuscitation.
Vasopressors are recommended only after adequate volume resuscitation.[2] [3] Therapeutic
vasoconstriction aims at reversing the mismatch between vessel tone and intravascular volume. Dose is
commonly titrated to achieve a mean arterial blood pressure of ≥65 mmHg, or a systolic blood pressure
of ≥90 mmHg.[2] [79] [82] Vasopressors increase the risk of tissue ischemia and necrosis in a dose-
dependent manner.
Consult a specialist for guidance on suitable vasopressor/inotrope regimens. Selection of appropriate
vasoactive agents should only take place under critical care supervision, and may vary according to the
type of shock, clinician preference, and local practice guidelines.
Temporary mechanical circulatory support
Temporary mechanical circulatory support (MCS) devices (e.g., extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
or intra-aortic balloon pump) should be considered in patients with persistent cardiogenic shock despite
inotropic therapy.[3] [4][83]
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Shock Management
Temporary MCS in appropriately selected candidates should be initiated as soon as possible with
sufficient support to fully reverse the potential hemometabolic consequences of shock. If there is a
delay to sufficient early support with temporary MCS, worsening end-organ perfusion and metabolic
derangements can make future attempts difficult.[83] The hemodynamic benefits of the specific
devices vary, and few head-to-head randomized comparisons exist. Vascular, bleeding, and neurologic
complications are common to MCS devices, and the risk of such complications should generally be
considered in the calculation to proceed with such support.[4] MCS requires specialist multidisciplinary
expertise for implantation and management.[3] [83]
The escalation of either pharmacologic and mechanical therapies should be considered in the context
of multidisciplinary teams of heart failure and critical care specialists, interventional cardiologists, and
cardiac surgeons.[4] [83]
Treatment of underlying cause
Volume resuscitation and vasoactive agents only buy time in most patients with shock. Successful
reversal of shock requires treatment specifically aimed at the main cause of shock (e.g., cardiogenic
shock, cardiac tamponade, pulmonary embolism, anaphylaxis, sepsis, hemorrhagic shock due to trauma,
tension pneumothorax). The choice of specific treatment is guided by the individual results of continued
and repeated patient evaluation.
Identification of cardiogenic shock is important because aggressive fluid administration may worsen
the shock state and lead to the onset (or worsening) of acute pulmonary edema. Early involvement
of specialist multidisciplinary teams (e.g., heart failure and critical care specialists, interventional
cardiologists, and cardiac surgeons) is recommended when cardiogenic shock is suspected. Cardiogenic
shock (secondary to a large myocardial infarction) needs urgent revascularization of the coronary arteries
by percutaneous coronary intervention, direct coronary infusion of thrombolytics, or cardiovascular
surgery.[50] [84] Mechanical support with an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) may also be indicated.[50]
However, multiple IABP studies have not shown an improvement in mortality.[50] [85] [86] [87]
Severe rhythm disturbances should be corrected urgently in patients with acute heart failure and unstable
conditions, using medical therapy, electrical cardioversion, or temporary pacing.[3] Cardiac tamponade
needs urgent drainage by pericardiocentesis under ECG monitoring.[88] This can have an effect by
draining as little as 30 mL, but may be unsuccessful if the blood is clotted. A pericardial drain or surgical
pericardial window may be required, with evaluation and treatment of the underlying cause of bleeding.
A pulmonary embolus may require thrombolysis, anticoagulation, and occasionally surgery if very large.
Anaphylactic shock requires administration of intramuscular epinephrine and supportive therapy.
Early recognition and treatment of septic shock is key to improving outcomes. The Surviving Sepsis
Campaign (SSC) treatment guidelines remain the most widely accepted standards.[2] Current
best practice is based on evidence for care bundles in sepsis.[2] [89] [90] [91] The SSC guidelines
recommend: 
• Obtaining blood cultures prior to administration of antibiotics
• Administering antimicrobials immediately, ideally within 1 hour of recognition (in adults with possible
septic shock or a high likelihood for sepsis)
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Shock Management
MANAGEMENT
• Administering empiric antimicrobials with MRSA coverage in patients with sepsis or septic shock at
high risk of MRSA
• Administering 30 mL/kg crystalloid for hypotension within the first 3 hours of resuscitation
• Obtaining serial measurement of blood lactate
• Aiming for a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of ≥65 mmHg in patients with septic shock on
vasopressors.
For adults with an initial diagnosis of sepsis or septic shock, and adequate source control where optimal
duration of therapy is unclear, a combination of procalcitonin and clinical evaluation is recommended to
decide when to discontinue antimicrobials.[2]
Resuscitation should be guided by dynamic measures rather than physical exam or static measures
alone. Dynamic parameters include the response to a passive leg raise or a fluid bolus, using stroke
volume, stroke volume variation, pulse pressure variation, or echocardiography, where available. In
patients with septic shock and an ongoing requirement for vasopressor therapy, the SSC treatment
guidelines suggest intravenous corticosteroids.[2]
Hemorrhagic shock due to trauma requires a team approach with attention to identification of cause for,
and control of, hemorrhage as soon as possible. Massive hemorrhage due to trauma is often associated
with fibrinolysis, which further exacerbates hemorrhage by inhibiting clot formation. Antifibrinolytic agents
may have a beneficial effect in addition to fluid and blood transfusion in stabilizing a trauma patient with
shock.[92] Overly aggressive fluid infusion may increase the bleeding rate in hemorrhagic shock: in
particular, when MAPs are >40 mmHg.[79] 
Tension pneumothorax requires urgent decompression through needle thoracocentesis.
Special considerations for suspected cardiogenic shock
Aggressive fluid administration in the setting of cardiogenic shock may worsen the shock state and lead
to the onset (or worsening) of acute pulmonary edema. Intravenous fluids may be administered cautiously
in the absence of signs of fluid overload (clinically determined by auscultation of the lungs to assess for
rales, or by chest radiography) with small initial boluses [250mL] of crystalloid such as normal saline
or Ringer lactate.[93] Ongoing management is guided by the continuous monitoring of organ perfusion
and hemodynamics. Specialized treatments for afterload reduction with nitroglycerin and the inotrope
dobutamine may be of benefit in the management of these patients.[94] Cardiogenic shock is classically
considered a state of decreased cardiac index, increased systemic vascular resistance, and increased
pulmonary artery pressure (often termed “wet cardiogenic shock” or with vascular volume overload);
euvolemic cardiogenic shock presents with decreased cardiac index, increased systemic vascular
resistance, and normal-range pulmonary artery pressure (“dry cardiogenic shock”). Afterload reduction is
an important initial step in the management of both forms of cardiogenic shock.[50]
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Shock Management
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute ( summary )
all patients
1st assessment of airway, breathing, and
circulation
plus treatment of underlying cause
consider vasoactive agents
cardiogenic shock not
suspected
plus intravenous fluids
consider blood products
consider tranexamic acid
cardiogenic shock
suspected
consider intravenous fluids
consider nitroglycerin
consider temporary mechanical circulatory support
(MCS)
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Shock Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute
all patients
1st assessment of airway, breathing, and
circulation
» Assessment and treatment proceed alongside
each other. At this stage the etiology of shock
may not be clear. Key first steps are to ensure a
patent airway (through intubation if required) and
to optimize oxygen delivery with supplemental
oxygen, commonly aiming for arterial oxygen
saturations of 94% to 98%.[34] Routine
supplementation of oxygen to achieve higher
oxygen saturations has been linked to coronary
and pulmonary arterial vasoconstriction in acute
myocardial infarction.[68] [69] For patients with
sepsis-induced hypoxemic respiratory failure,
high-flow nasal oxygen is recommended over
noninvasive ventilation.[2]
» Continuous monitoring is imperative to monitor
response to therapy and to guide treatment. This
includes clinical observation, repeated blood
pressure readings, respiratory rate, oxygen
saturations, pulse, level of consciousness, and
monitoring of cardiac rhythm. In the critical care
setting, continuous capnography can aid the
assessment of shock.[36] Side stream or direct
capnography (when endotracheal airway is in
place) can be helpful in assessing pulmonary
perfusion matched to ventilation.[36] The lactate
level will usually decrease if the patient is
clinically improving.[2] Treatment is dependent
on continuous monitoring of these variables and
guided by their response.
plus treatment of underlying cause
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» The underlying cause of shock needs to be
identified as rapidly as possible. It indicates the
most critical treatment priorities.
» Identification of cardiogenic shock is important
because aggressive fluid administration may
worsen the shock state and lead to the onset
(or worsening) of acute pulmonary edema.
Early involvement of specialist multidisciplinary
teams (e.g., heart failure and critical care
specialists, interventional cardiologists, and
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Shock Management
Acute
cardiac surgeons) is recommended when
cardiogenic shock is suspected.[4]
» In cardiogenic shock secondary to a large
myocardial infarction, urgent revascularization
of the coronary arteries, by percutaneous
coronary intervention, direct coronary infusion of
thrombolytics, or cardiovascular surgery, lowers
mortality.[50] [84]
» Severe rhythm disturbances should be
corrected urgently in patients with acute heart
failure and unstable conditions, using medical
therapy, electrical cardioversion, or temporary
pacing.[3]
» Cardiac tamponade needs drainage;
pericardiocentesis under ECG monitoring can
have an effect by draining as little as 30 mL, but
this may be unsuccessful if the blood is clotted.
A pericardial drain or surgical pericardial window
may be required.
» In pulmonary embolism, shock is the most
widely accepted indication for thrombolysis.[110]
[111] Emergency embolectomy is an alternative,
especially when thrombolysis is contraindicated
or has failed.
» For anaphylactic shock, intramuscular
epinephrine (adrenaline) is recommended
as the most important treatment by all major
guidelines.[63] [64] [65]
» Early recognition and treatment of septic shock
is key to improving outcomes. Current best
practice is based on evidence for care bundles
in sepsis.[2] [89] [90] [91] The Surviving Sepsis
Campaign (SSC) treatment guidelines remain
the most widely accepted standards.[2] The
SSC guidelines recommend obtaining blood
cultures prior to the administration of antibiotics;
administering antimicrobials immediately, ideally
within 1 hour of recognition (in adults with
possible septic shock or a high likelihood for
sepsis); administering empiric antimicrobials
with MRSA coverage in patients with sepsis or
septic shock at high risk of MRSA; administering
30 mL/kg crystalloid for hypotension within the
first 3 hours of resuscitation; obtaining serial
measurement of blood lactate; aiming for a
mean arterial pressure of ≥65 mmHg in patients
with septic shock on vasopressors. For adults
with an initial diagnosis of sepsis or septic shock,
and adequate source control where optimal
duration of therapy is unclear, a combination
of procalcitonin and clinical evaluation is
recommended to decide when to discontinue
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Shock Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
antimicrobials.[2] The SSC suggests intravenous
corticosteroids in adults with septic shock and an
ongoing requirement for vasopressor therapy.[2]
» Hemorrhagic shock due to trauma requires a
team approach with attention to identification of
cause for, and control of, hemorrhage as soon
as possible. Massive hemorrhage due to trauma
is often associated with fibrinolysis, which further
exacerbates hemorrhage by inhibiting clot
formation. Antifibrinolytic agents may have a
beneficial effect in addition to fluid and blood
transfusion in stabilizing a trauma patient with
shock.[92] Overly aggressive fluid infusion may
increase the bleeding rate in hemorrhagic shock:
in particular, when mean arterial pressures are
>40 mmHg.[79]
» Tension pneumothorax requires urgent
decompression through needle thoracocentesis.
consider vasoactive agents
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Short-term intravenous infusion of a vasoactive
agent (vasopressor and/or inotrope) should be
considered in patients with hypotension (systolic
BP <90mmHg) and/or signs or symptoms of
hypoperfusion, despite adequate filling status.[4]
» Patients requiring vasoactive drugs
(vasopressors/inotropes) need continuous
monitoring in a critical care setting. Vasoactive
agents may cause tachycardia, and induce
arrhythmias and myocardial ischemia.[4]
Selection of appropriate vasoactive agents
should only take place under critical care
supervision, and may vary according to the type
of shock, clinician preference, and local practice
guidelines.
» Intravenous inotropic support can increase
cardiac output and improve hemodynamics in
patients presenting with cardiogenic shock.[4]
There is a lack of robust evidence to suggest
the clear benefit of one inotropic agent over
another in cardiogenic shock.[80] In general,
the choice of a specific inotropic agent is guided
by blood pressure, concurrent arrhythmias, and
availability of drug.[4] Inotropes should be used
with caution because there is evidence that they
result in increased mortality.[3] [4] [81] Inotropes
should be discontinued if there are sustained
arrhythmias or symptomatic coronary ischemia.
Continuous monitoring of cardiac rhythm is
recommended during infusion of inotropes.
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Shock Management
Acute
» Vasopressors are commonly recommended
only after adequate volume resuscitation.[2] [3]
 Dose is commonly titrated to achieve a mean
arterial blood pressure of ≥65 mmHg, or a
systolic blood pressure of ≥90 mmHg.[2] [79]
[82] Vasopressors increase the risk of tissue
ischemia and necrosis in a dose-dependent
manner.
» Consult a specialist for guidance on suitable
vasopressor/inotrope regimens and doses.
cardiogenic shock not
suspected
plus intravenous fluids
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Evidence-based guidelines for the
management of septic shock recommend 30mL/
kg intravenous crystalloid fluid within the first 3
hours.[2] Ongoing management is guided by
the continuous monitoring of organ perfusion
and hemodynamics. Resuscitation in sepsis
should be guided by dynamic measures rather
than by physical exam or static measures alone.
Dynamic parameters include the response to a
passive leg raise or a fluid bolus, using stroke
volume, stroke volume variation, pulse pressure
variation, or echocardiography, where available.
Predicting the effect of further volume in any
individual patient requires considerable clinical
judgment because no single, simple, and precise
measure has been yet identified. Central venous
pressure and ultrasonic parameters (central
inferior vena cava diameter and collapsibility
and aortic blood flow) are useful.[2] [66] [79]
 Commonly, systolic blood pressure of 90 mmHg
or a mean arterial pressure of 65 mmHg is
targeted during fluid volume resuscitation;
infusion is stopped if concerns of volume
overload develop (pulmonary rales or suspected
pulmonary edema). 
» The major risk with volume resuscitation
is pulmonary edema. In hemorrhagic shock,
overly aggressive fluid infusion may increase the
bleeding rate, in particular when mean arterial
pressures are >40 mmHg.[79]
» If there is no evidence for, or suspicion of,
pulmonary edema secondary to cardiac failure,
early fluid delivery is more important than the
type of fluid (crystalloid or colloid).[71] [72] [73]
There is no evidence for any survival benefit
of colloid fluids over crystalloid.[73] [112] [113]
[114] [115] [Evidence B] There is some evidence
that balanced crystalloids may be preferable to
normal saline in critically ill patients in intensive
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Shock Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
care, although other studies have found no
difference.[76] [116] The Surviving Sepsis
Campaign recommends balanced crystalloids
in patients with sepsis or septic shock.[2] In July
2021, the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) issued safety labeling changes for
solutions containing hydroxyethyl starch (HES)
stating that HES products should not be used
unless adequate alternative treatment is
unavailable.[74] HES products are associated
with adverse outcomes including kidney injury
and death, particularly in critically ill patients
and those with sepsis.[79] [117] In view of the
serious risks posed to these patient populations,
the Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment
Committee of the European Medicines Agency
in February 2022 recommended suspending
HES solutions for infusion in Europe.[75] The
Surviving Sepsis Campaign advises against
the use of starches for patients with sepsis and
septic shock.[2]
consider blood products
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Indicated in patients with acute hemorrhage
or profound anemia from chronic red blood cell
loss.[78]
consider tranexamic acid
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» tranexamic acid: consult specialist for
guidance on dose
» For patients with severe hemorrhage caused
by trauma, tranexamic acid can be used within
3 hours of the initial injury. A meta-analysis
found strong evidence that treatment should
be immediate for maximum survival benefit,
with even a short delay associated with higher
mortality.[118] It should be avoided if there are
known hypercoagulable states.
cardiogenic shock
suspected
consider intravenous fluids
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Early involvement of specialist multidisciplinary
teams is recommended when cardiogenic shock
is suspected (e.g., heart failure and critical
care specialists, interventional cardiologists,
and cardiac surgeons).[4] Aggressive fluid
administration in the setting of cardiogenic shock
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Shock Management
Acute
may worsen the shock state and lead to the
onset of acute pulmonary edema.
» Intravenous fluids may be administered
cautiously in the absence of signs of fluid
overload (clinically determined by auscultation
of the lungs to assess for rales or by chest
radiography) in a patient with cardiogenic shock
(e.g. small initial boluses [250mL] of crystalloid
such as normal saline or Ringer lactate).[93] 
» Ongoing management is guided by the
continuous monitoring of organ perfusion
and hemodynamics. Predicting the effect of
further volume in any individual patient requires
considerable clinical judgment, because no
single, simple, and precise measure has been
yet identified. Central venous pressure and
ultrasonic parameters (central inferior vena
cava diameter and collapsibility and aortic
blood flow) are useful.[66] [79] Commonly,
systolic blood pressure of 90 mmHg or a mean
arterial pressure of 65 mmHg is targeted
during fluid volume resuscitation; infusion is
stopped if concerns of volume overload develop
(pulmonary rales or suspected pulmonary
edema).
» Fluid delivery is more important than the
type of fluid (crystalloid or colloid).[71] [72] [73]
There is no evidence for any survival benefit
of colloid fluids over crystalloid.[73] [112] [113]
[114] [115] [Evidence B] There is some evidence
that balanced crystalloids may be preferable to
normal saline in critically ill patients in intensive
care, although other studies have found no
difference.[76] [116] In July 2021, the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued
safety labeling changes for solutions containing
hydroxyethyl starch (HES) stating that HES
products should not be used unless adequate
alternative treatment is unavailable.[74]
HES products are associated with adverse
outcomes including kidney injury and death,
particularly in critically ill patients and those
with sepsis.[79] [117] In view of the serious
risks posed to these patient populations, the
Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee
of the European Medicines Agency in February
2022 recommended suspending HES solutions
for infusion in Europe.[75]
» If there is acute inferior (right coronary artery)
occlusion, or right ventricular infarct, hypotension
is initially (before thrombectomy) corrected
with careful fluid administration to improve right
ventricular filling and overall cardiac output.[77]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Shock Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
consider nitroglycerin
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» nitroglycerin: 5-20 micrograms/minute
intravenous infusion initially, titrate according
to effect (improved cardiac function and
decreased pulmonary edema symptoms),
maximum 200 micrograms/minute
» Patients with cardiogenic shock with
pulmonary edema and relatively stable blood
pressure (with systolic blood pressure >90
mmHg) may benefit from afterload reduction with
intravenous nitroglycerin.
consider temporary mechanical circulatory support
(MCS)
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Temporary MCS devices (e.g., extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation or intra-aortic balloon
pump) should be considered in patients with
persistent cardiogenic shock maintained
despite inotropic therapy.[3] [4] Temporary
MCS in appropriately selected candidates
should be initiated as soon as possible with
sufficient support to fully reverse the potential
hemometabolic consequences of shock. If
there is a delay to sufficient early support with
temporary MCS, worsening end-organ perfusion
and metabolic derangements can make future
attempts difficult.[83] The hemodynamic benefits
of the specific devices vary, and few head-to-
head randomized comparisons exist. Vascular,
bleeding, and neurologic complications are
common to MCS devices, and the risk of such
complications should generally be considered in
the calculation to proceed with such support.[4]
MCS requires specialist multidisciplinary
expertise for implantation and management.[3]
The escalation of either pharmacologic and
mechanical therapies should be considered in
the context of multidisciplinary teams of heart
failure and critical care specialists, interventional
cardiologists, and cardiac surgeons.[4] [83]
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Shock Management
Emerging
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may play a role in management of cardiogenic shock by
providing mechanical pulmonary and circulatory support when the shock state is refractory to medical and
surgical therapy.[119] [120] [121] ECMO may also be useful in sepsis-induced severe acute respiratory
distress syndrome when conventional mechanical ventilation fails, in centers where the expertise and
infrastructure is in place to support its use.[2]
Polymyxin B hemoperfusion
Meta-analysis suggests that polymyxin B hemoperfusion, a technique that removes circulating endotoxins
extracorporeally using a polymyxin B-adsorbing cartridge, may reduce mortality in patients with severe
sepsis and septic shock in specific disease severity subgroups.[122] However, in one subsequent
randomized controlled trial, targeted polymyxin B hemoperfusion did not reduce 28-day mortality in patients
with septic shock (high acuity, and at higher risk of death than patients enrolled in prior trials) and elevated
endotoxin level.[123] The Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines advise against using polymyxin B in
patients with sepsis or septic shock on the basis of several factors. These include uncertainty with regard to
any beneficial effect, the potential frequency of undesirable side effects, significant expense, and resource
intensiveness.[2]
Primary prevention
Early and effective management of any severe disease will prevent progression to shock in many cases.
Examples are early recognition and treatment of sepsis, or timely reperfusion with thrombolysis or
angioplasty in myocardial infarction.[2][23]
Early detection of critical illness and deterioration is important to prevent the development of shock. Early
warning scores (sometimes also known as modified early warning scores [MEWS], patient at risk scores, or
track and trigger scores) are based on physiologic variables such as heart rate and blood pressure, and they
can easily be calculated at the bedside by nursing staff or doctors on any patient in whom there is cause for
concern. These scores can be helpful in predicting potential deterioration and allow for early intervention.
The exact scoring system in use tends to vary between hospitals and between countries: for example, in the
UK the most commonly used score is the National Early Warning Score (NEWS2).[24]
Patient discussions
Specific instructions will depend on the etiology of shock. If anaphylaxis is responsible, the patient will
need to avoid future exposure to the allergen and may require an epinephrine pen to carry with them after
appropriate training in how and when to use it.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Shock Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Monitoring
Monitoring
Once appropriate treatment is established, careful monitoring of vital signs, nutritional status, wound
healing, and inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein and white blood cell), lactate levels and urine
output is required to ensure that clinical improvement continues and complications are detected and
managed early.[2] There is no specific follow-up for shock, but it should be tailored to the etiology (e.g.,
cardiogenic causes that have been successfully treated are likely to require intensive follow-up with the
cardiologist to optimize medications and consider any future treatment).
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
volume overload-induced pulmonary edema short term low
Depending on variable individual factors, treatment options include continuous positive airway pressure
ventilation, mechanical ventilation, and diuretics to increase renal output. May result in the development of
acute respiratory distress syndrome.
organ failure variable high
Hypoperfusion from any etiology may lead to multiorgan failure, which may be irreversible. This is best
prevented by volume resuscitation and early treatment of the underlying cause.
vasopressor-induced gangrene variable low
Risk depends on dose, duration, and agent. Patient factors also contribute, in particular the presence
and grade of peripheral arterial occlusive disease. The main treatment options are dose reduction of
vasopressors and amputation.
disseminated intravascular coagulation variable low
The clotting cascade becomes abnormally activated, and clotting factors become consumed by the
formation of small clots within blood vessels. This results in abnormal bleeding from the skin and mucous
membranes, known as disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). DIC can result from any form
of shock as well as from endotoxin release from organisms in the context of sepsis. DIC is a serious
consequence of shock that often results in acute kidney injury and death.
hospital-acquired infections variable low
Shock is best managed in a critical care environment. Indwelling lines and catheters, injuries from
trauma, longer patient stay, and use of antibiotics all contribute to increasing the risk of hospital-acquired
infections. In patients with sepsis, empiric antibiotics should be narrowed as soon as a pathogen has been
identified and sensitivities are available.[2][126]
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Shock Follow up
Prognosis
Mortality
Shock has a high mortality but this is dependent on cause. Hospital mortality of septic shock is as high as
62%.[8] [9] The odds of dying from a myocardial infarction increase by over 20-fold when it is complicated
by shock. Hospital mortality of cardiogenic shock reaches 50% to 60%.[10] [11] A high proportion of these
deaths (70% to 80%) occur in the first 30 to 60 days after onset of cardiogenic shock.[15]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Shock Guidelines
GUIDELINES
Diagnostic guidelines
International
AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management of heart failure  [4]
Published by:  American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Last published: 2022
Contemporary management of cardiogenic shock  [50]
Published by:  American Heart Association Last published: 2017
Suspected sepsis: recognition, diagnosis and early management  [62]
Published by:  National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2024
2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic
heart failure  [3]
Published by:  European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2021
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Shock Guidelines
Treatment guidelines
International
AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management of heart failure  [4]
Published by:  American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Last published: 2022
2020 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary
resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care  [64]
Published by:  American Heart Association Last published: 2020
Monitoring modalities, assessment of volume status, and endpoints of
resuscitation  [124]
Published by:  Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma Last published: 2018
American College of Critical Care Medicine clinical practice parameters for
hemodynamic support of pediatric and neonatal septic shock  [67]
Published by:  Society of Critical Care Medicine Last published: 2017
Contemporary management of cardiogenic shock  [50]
Published by:  American Heart Association Last published: 2017
Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for management of
sepsis and septic shock, 2021  [2]
Published by:  Surviving Sepsis Campaign Last published: 2021
Suspected sepsis: recognition, diagnosis and early management  [62]
Published by:  National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK) Last published: 2024
2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic
heart failure  [3]
Published by:  European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2021
European Resuscitation Council guidelines for resuscitation 2021  [65]
Published by:  European Resuscitation Council Last published: 2021
Emergency treatment of anaphylactic reactions  [125]
Published by:  Resuscitation Council (UK) Last published: 2021
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Shock Evidence tables
EVIDENCE TABLES
Evidence tables
How do colloids compare with crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in critically ill
people?
This table is a summary of the analysis reported in a Cochrane Clinical Answer that focuses on the
above important clinical question.
View the full source Cochrane Clinical Answer
Evidence B  * Confidence in the evidence is moderate or low to moderate where GRADE has been
performed and there may be no difference in effectiveness between the intervention
and comparison for most outcomes.
Population: People with a range of diagnoses (most commonly trauma, sepsis, septic shock, hypovolemia,
hemorrhagic shock, burns) requiring fluid volume resuscitation
Intervention: Colloids (starches; dextrans; gelatins; albumin or fresh frozen plasma) #
Comparison: Crystalloids
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
Starch solution versus crystalloids #
Mortality: at the end of follow-
up #
No statistically significant
difference
Moderate
Transfusion of blood product Favors comparison Moderate
Renal replacement therapy Favors comparison Moderate
Adverse events: allergic
reaction
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Adverse events: itching Occurs more commonly with
starch compared with crystalloids
(favors comparison)
Very Low
Adverse events: rash No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Dextrans versus crystalloids
Mortality: at the end of follow-
up #
No statistically significant
difference
Moderate
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Shock Evidence tables
Outcome Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
†
Confidence in evidence (GRADE)
‡
Transfusion of blood products No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Adverse events: allergic
reaction
No statistically significant
difference
Moderate
Renal replacement therapy - None of the studies identified by the
review assessed this outcome
Gelatins versus crystalloids
Mortality: at the end of follow-
up #
No statistically significant
difference
Low
Transfusion of blood product No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Adverse events No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Renal replacement therapy - See note #
Albumin or fresh frozen plasma versus crystalloids
Mortality: at the end of follow-
up #
No statistically significant
difference
Moderate
Transfusion of blood product No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Renal replacement therapy No statistically significant
difference
Low
Adverse events (allergic
reactions)
No statistically significant
difference
Very Low
Note
# Important information post publication of the Cochrane Clinical Answer (CCA): In July 2021, the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued safety labeling changes for solutions containing hydroxyethyl
starch (HES) stating that HES products should not be used unless adequate alternative treatment is
unavailable.[74] The Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee of the European Medicines Agency in
February 2022 recommended suspending HES solutions for infusion.[75]
# The CCA also reports mortality within 30 days and 90 days as a subgroup analysis; moderate-quality
evidence also reported no statistically significant difference between treatment groups.
# Low-quality evidence also reported no statistically significant difference between gelatins and crystalloids
for mortality within 30 days and within 90 days.
EVIDENCE TABLES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Shock Evidence tables
EVIDENCE TABLES
# The reviewers of the main Cochrane review which this CCA is based on found one RCT which assessed
the effectiveness of colloids for this outcome, but gelatins were not reported separately.
* Evidence levels
The Evidence level is an internal rating applied by BMJ Best Practice. See the EBM Toolkit for details.
Confidence in evidence
A -  High or moderate to high
B -  Moderate or low to moderate
C -  Very low or low
† Effectiveness (BMJ rating)
Based on statistical significance, which demonstrates that the results are unlikely to be due to chance, but
which does not necessarily translate to a clinical significance.
‡ Grade certainty ratings
High The authors are very confident that the true
effect is similar to the estimated effect.
Moderate The authors are moderately confident that
the true effect is likely to be close to the
estimated effect.
Low The authors have limited confidence in the
effect estimate and the true effect may be
substantially different.
Very Low The authors have very little confidence in
the effect estimate and the true effect is
likely to be substantially different.
BMJ Best Practice EBM Toolkit: What is GRADE?
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Shock References
Key articles
• Cecconi M, De Backer D, Antonelli M, et al. Consensus on circulatory shock and hemodynamic
monitoring. Task force of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care Med. 2014
Dec;40(12):1795-815.  Full text   Abstract
• Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: international guidelines for
management of sepsis and septic shock 2021. Intensive Care Med. 2021 Nov;47(11):1181-247.  Full
text   Abstract
• McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
acute and chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2021 Sep 21;42(36):3599-726.  Full text   Abstract
• Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management
of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 May 3;79(17):e263-421.  Full text  
Abstract
• van Diepen S, Katz JN, Albert NM, et al. Contemporary management of cardiogenic shock: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017 Oct 17;136(16):e232-68.  Full text  
Abstract
References
1. Cecconi M, De Backer D, Antonelli M, et al. Consensus on circulatory shock and hemodynamic
monitoring. Task force of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care Med. 2014
Dec;40(12):1795-815.  Full text   Abstract
2. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: international guidelines for
management of sepsis and septic shock 2021. Intensive Care Med. 2021 Nov;47(11):1181-247.  Full
text   Abstract
3. McDonagh TA, Metra M, Adamo M, et al. 2021 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
acute and chronic heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2021 Sep 21;42(36):3599-726.  Full text   Abstract
4. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management
of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 May 3;79(17):e263-421.  Full text  
Abstract
5. De Backer D, Biston P, Devriendt J, et al; SOAP II Investigators. Comparison of dopamine and
norepinephrine in the treatment of shock. N Engl J Med. 2010 Mar 4;362(9):779-89. Abstract
6. Angus DC, Linde-Zwirble WT, Lidicker J, et al. Epidemiology of severe sepsis in the United States:
analysis of incidence, outcome, and associated costs of care. Crit Care Med. 2001 Jul;29(7):1303-10.
Abstract
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Shock References
REFERENCES
7. Brun-Buisson C, Meshaka P, Pinton P, et al. EPISEPSIS: a reappraisal of the epidemiology and
outcome of severe sepsis in French intensive care units. Intensive Care Med. 2004 Apr;30(4):580-8.
Abstract
8. Engel C, Brunkhorst FM, Bone HG, et al. Epidemiology of sepsis in Germany: results from a national
prospective multicenter study. Intensive Care Med. 2007 Apr;33(4):606-18. Abstract
9. Esteban A, Frutos-Vivar F, Ferguson ND, et al. Sepsis incidence and outcome: contrasting the
intensive care unit with the hospital ward. Crit Care Med. 2007 May;35(5):1284-9. Abstract
10. Goldberg RJ, Samad NA, Yarzebski J, et al. Temporal trends in cardiogenic shock complicating acute
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 1999 Apr 15;340(15):1162-8.  Full text   Abstract
11. Babaev A, Frederick PD, Pasta DJ, et al. Trends in management and outcomes of patients with acute
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. JAMA. 2005 Jul 27;294(4):448-54.  Full text  
Abstract
12. Steg PG, Goldberg RJ, Gore JM, et al. Baseline characteristics, management practices, and in-
hospital outcomes of patients hospitalized with acute coronary syndromes in the Global Registry of
Acute Coronary Events (GRACE). Am J Cardiol. 2002 Aug 15;90(4):358-63. Abstract
13. Koek HL, Kardaun JW, Gevers E, et al. Acute myocardial infarction incidence and hospital
mortality: routinely collected national data versus linkage of national registers. Eur J Epidemiol.
2007;22(11):755-62.  Full text   Abstract
14. Roger VL, Jacobsen SJ, Weston SA, et al. Trends in the incidence and survival of patients with
hospitalized myocardial infarction, Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1979 to 1994. Ann Intern Med. 2002
Mar 5;136(5):341-8. Abstract
15. Chioncel O, Parissis J, Mebazaa A, et al. Epidemiology, pathophysiology and contemporary
management of cardiogenic shock - a position statement from the Heart Failure Association of the
European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Heart Fail. 2020 Aug;22(8):1315-41.  Full text   Abstract
16. Thiele H, Ohman EM, Desch S, et al. Management of cardiogenic shock. Eur Heart J. 2015 May
21;36(20):1223-30.  Full text   Abstract
17. Thomas NJ, Carcillo JA. Hypovolemic shock in pediatric patients. New Horiz. 1998 May;6(2):120-9.
Abstract
18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. Web-
based injury statistics query and reporting system (WISQARS). Dec 2021 [internet publication].  Full
text
19. Rossaint R, Bouillon B, Cerny V, et al. The European guideline on management of major bleeding and
coagulopathy following trauma: fourth edition. Crit Care. 2016 Apr 12;20:100.  Full text   Abstract
20. Cannon JW. Hemorrhagic shock. N Engl J Med. 2018 Jan 25;378(4):370-9. Abstract
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Shock References
21. Geppert A, Steiner A, Zorn G, et al. Multiple organ failure in patients with cardiogenic shock is
associated with high plasma levels of interleukin-6. Crit Care Med. 2002 Sep;30(9):1987-94. Abstract
22. Edgren G, Almqvist R, Hartman M, et al. Splenectomy and the risk of sepsis: a population-based
cohort study. Ann Surg. 2014 Dec;260(6):1081-7. Abstract
23. Brodie BR, Hansen C, Stuckey TD, et al. Door-to-balloon time with primary percutaneous coronary
intervention for acute myocardial infarction impacts late cardiac mortality in high-risk patients and
patients presenting early after the onset of symptoms. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Jan 17;47(2):289-95. 
Full text   Abstract
24. Royal College of Physicians. National early warning score (NEWS) 2. December 2017 [internet
publication].  Full text
25. Carney N, Totten AM, O'Reilly C, et al. Guidelines for the management of severe traumatic brain injury,
Fourth Edition. Neurosurgery. 2017 Jan 1;80(1):6-15.  Full text   Abstract
26. Resuscitation Council UK. Resuscitation guidelines: the ABCDE approach. 2024 [internet publication]. 
Full text
27. Berger T, Green J, Horeczko T, et al. Shock index and early recognition of sepsis in the emergency
department: pilot study. West J Emerg Med. 2013 Mar;14(2):168-74.  Full text   Abstract
28. National Patient Safety Agency. Alert: Blood control safety cannula and needle thoracostomy for
tension pneumothorax. April 2020 [internet publication].  Full text
29. Leigh-Smith S, Harris T. Tension pneumothorax - time for a re-think? Emerg Med J. 2005
Jan;22(1):8-16.  Full text   Abstract
30. Jones R, Hollingsworth J. Tension pneumothoraces not responding to needle thoracocentesis. Emerg
Med J. 2002 Mar;19(2):176-7.  Full text   Abstract
31. Ibanez B, James S, Agewall S, et al. 2017 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute myocardial
infarction in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation: The Task Force for the management of
acute myocardial infarction in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation of the European Society
of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2018 Jan 7;39(2):119-77.  Full text   Abstract
32. Lee JW. Fluid and electrolyte disturbances in critically ill patients. Electrolyte Blood Press. 2010
Dec;8(2):72-81.  Full text   Abstract
33. Bonanno FG. Clinical pathology of the shock syndromes. J Emerg Trauma Shock. 2011
Apr;4(2):233-43.  Full text   Abstract
34. O'Driscoll BR, Howard LS, Earis J, et al. BTS guideline for oxygen use in adults in healthcare and
emergency settings. Thorax. 2017 Jun;72(suppl 1):ii1-90. Abstract
35. Marik PE, Bellomo R. Stress hyperglycemia: an essential survival response!. Crit Care. 2013 Mar
6;17(2):305.  Full text   Abstract
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Shock References
REFERENCES
36. Nassar BS, Schmidt GA. Capnography during critical illness. Chest. 2016 Feb;149(2):576-85. Abstract
37. Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in the treatment of severe sepsis and
septic shock. N Engl J Med. 2001 Nov 8;345(19):1368-77.  Full text   Abstract
38. Gilbert RE, Mok Q, Dwan K, et al. Impregnated central venous catheters for prevention of
bloodstream infection in children (the CATCH trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2016 Apr
23;387(10029):1732-42. Abstract
39. Simundic AM, Bölenius K, Cadamuro J, et al. Joint EFLM-COLABIOCLI recommendation for venous
blood sampling. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2018;56(12):2015-38. Abstract
40. Levin A, Warnock DG, Mehta RL, et al. Improving outcomes from acute kidney injury: report of an
initiative. Am J Kidney Dis. 2007 Jul;50(1):1-4. Abstract
41. Revelly JP, Tappy L, Martinez A, et al. Lactate and glucose metabolism in severe sepsis and
cardiogenic shock. Crit Care Med. 2005 Oct;33(10):2235-40. Abstract
42. Carvounis CP, Nisar S, Guro-Razuman S. Significance of the fractional excretion of urea in the
differential diagnosis of acute renal failure. Kidney Int. 2002 Dec;62(6):2223-9.  Full text   Abstract
43. Joint British Diabetes Societies for Inpatient Care. The management of diabetic ketoacidosis in adults.
March 2023 [internet publication].  Full text
44. Kraut JA, Kurtz I. Toxic alcohol ingestions: clinical features, diagnosis, and management. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol. 2008 Jan;3(1):208-25.  Full text   Abstract
45. Kitabchi AE, Umpierrez GE, Murphy MB, et al. Management of hyperglycemic crises in patients with
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2001 Jan;24(1):131-53. Abstract
46. Kitabchi AE, Umpierrez GE, Miles JM, et al. Hyperglycemic crises in adult patients with diabetes.
Diabetes Care. 2009 Jul;32(7):1335-43.  Full text   Abstract
47. Subramaniam B, Talmor D. Echocardiography for management of hypotension in the intensive care
unit. Crit Care Med. 2007 Aug;35(8 suppl):S401-7. Abstract
48. Beaulieu Y. Bedside echocardiography in the assessment of the critically ill. Crit Care Med. 2007
May;35(5 suppl):S235-49. Abstract
49. Joseph MX, Disney PJ, Da Costa R, et al. Transthoracic echocardiography to identify or exclude
cardiac cause of shock. Chest. 2004 Nov;126(5):1592-7. Abstract
50. van Diepen S, Katz JN, Albert NM, et al. Contemporary management of cardiogenic shock: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017 Oct 17;136(16):e232-68.  Full text  
Abstract
51. Chalupa P, Beran O, Herwald H, et al. Evaluation of potential biomarkers for the discrimination of
bacterial and viral infections. Infection. 2011 Oct;39(5):411-7. Abstract
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Shock References
52. McCann FJ, Chapman SJ, Yu WC, et al. Ability of procalcitonin to discriminate infection from non-
infective inflammation using two pleural disease settings. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e49894.  Full text  
Abstract
53. Becker KL, Snider R, Nylen ES. Procalcitonin assay in systemic inflammation, infection, and sepsis:
clinical utility and limitations. Crit Care Med. 2008 Mar;36(3):941-52. Abstract
54. Phua J, Koay ES, Lee KH. Lactate, procalcitonin, and amino-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide
versus cytokine measurements and clinical severity scores for prognostication in septic shock. Shock.
2008 Mar;29(3):328-33.  Full text   Abstract
55. American Society for Clinical Pathology. Thirty five things physicians and patients should question.
Choosing Wisely, an initiative of the ABIM Foundation. 2022 [internet publication].  Full text
56. Lubner M, Demertzis J, Lee JY, et al. CT evaluation of shock viscera: a pictorial review. Emerg Radiol.
2008 Jan;15(1):1-11. Abstract
57. Tarrant AM, Ryan MF, Hamilton PA, et al. A pictorial review of hypovolaemic shock in adults. Br J
Radiol. 2008 Mar;81(963):252-7. Abstract
58. Konstantinides SV, Meyer G, Becattini C, et al. 2019 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of acute pulmonary embolism developed in collaboration with the European Respiratory
Society (ERS). Eur Heart J. 2020 Jan 21;41(4):543-603.  Full text   Abstract
59. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Venous thromboembolic diseases: diagnosis,
management and thrombophilia testing. August 2023 [internet publication].  Full text
60. Kristensen AK, Holler JG, Hallas J, et al. Is shock index a valid predictor of mortality in emergency
department patients with hypertension, diabetes, high age, or receipt of β- or calcium channel
blockers? Ann Emerg Med. 2016 Jan;67(1):106-13. Abstract
61. Subbe CP, Kruger M, Rutherford P, et al. Validation of a modified Early Warning Score in medical
admissions. QJM. 2001 Oct;94(10):521-6.  Full text   Abstract
62. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Suspected sepsis: recognition, diagnosis and early
management. March 2024 [internet publication].  Full text
63. Golden DBK, Wang J, Waserman S, et al. Anaphylaxis: a 2023 practice parameter update. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol. 2024 Feb;132(2):124-76.  Full text   Abstract
64. Panchal AR, Bartos JA, Cabañas JG, et al. Part 3: Adult Basic and Advanced Life Support:
2020 American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency
cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2020 Oct 20;142(16_suppl_2):S366-S468.  Full text   Abstract
65. Lott C, Truhlář A, Alfonzo A, et al. European Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Cardiac arrest in
special circumstances. Resuscitation. 2021 Apr;161:152-219.  Full text   Abstract
66. Nieminen MS, Böhm M, Cowie MR, et al. Executive summary of the guidelines on the diagnosis and
treatment of acute heart failure. Eur Heart J. 2005 Feb;26(4):384-416.  Full text   Abstract
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Shock References
REFERENCES
67. Davis AL, Carcillo JA, Aneja RK, et al. American College of Critical Care Medicine clinical practice
parameters for hemodynamic support of pediatric and neonatal septic shock. Crit Care Med. 2017
Jun;45(6):1061-93.  Full text   Abstract
68. McNulty PH, King N, Scott S, et al. Effects of supplemental oxygen administration on coronary
blood flow in patients undergoing cardiac catheterization. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2005
Mar;288(3):H1057-62.  Full text   Abstract
69. Rawles JM, Kenmure AC. Controlled trial of oxygen in uncomplicated myocardial infarction. Br Med J.
1976 May 8;1(6018):1121-3.  Full text   Abstract
70. Ferreyro BL, Angriman F, Munshi L, et al. Association of noninvasive oxygenation strategies with
all-cause mortality in adults with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure: a systematic feview and meta-
analysis. JAMA. 2020 Jul 7;324(1):57-67.  Full text   Abstract
71. Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al; the SAFE study investigators. A comparison of albumin and saline
for fluid resuscitation in the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med. 2004 May 27;350(22):2247-56.  Full text 
Abstract
72. Roberts I, Blackhall K, Alderson P, et al. Human albumin solution for resuscitation and volume
expansion in critically ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011 Nov 9;(11):CD001208.  Full text  
Abstract
73. Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, Evans DJ, et al. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in critically
ill people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2018 Aug 3;(8):CD000567.  Full text   Abstract
74. US Food and Drug Administration. Labeling changes on mortality, kidney injury, and excess bleeding
with hydroxyethyl starch products. Jul 2021 [internet publication].  Full text
75. European Medicines Agency. PRAC recommends suspending hydroxyethyl-starch solutions for
infusion from the market. Feb 2022 [internet publication].  Full text
76. Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al. Balanced crystalloids versus saline in critically ill adults. N
Engl J Med. 2018 Mar 1;378(9):829-39.  Full text   Abstract
77. Inohara T, Kohsaka S, Fukuda K, et al. The challenges in the management of right ventricular
infarction. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2013 Sep;2(3):226-34.  Full text   Abstract
78. Association of Anaesthetists. AAGBI guidelines: the use of blood components and their alternatives
2016. April 2016 [internet publication].  Full text
79. Antonelli M, Levy M, Andrews PJ, et al. Hemodynamic monitoring in shock and implications for
management: international consensus conference, Paris, France, 27-28 April 2006. Intensive Care
Med. 2007 Apr;33(4):575-90. Abstract
80. Kivikko M, Pollesello P, Tarvasmäki T, et al. Effect of baseline characteristics on mortality in the
SURVIVE trial on the effect of levosimendan vs dobutamine in acute heart failure: Sub-analysis of the
Finnish patients. Int J Cardiol. 2016 Jul 15;215:26-31.  Full text   Abstract
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Shock References
81. Abraham WT, Adams KF, Fonarow GC, et al. In-hospital mortality in patients with acute
decompensated heart failure requiring intravenous vasoactive medications: an analysis from the
Acute Decompensated Heart Failure National Registry (ADHERE). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005 Jul
5;46(1):57-64.  Full text   Abstract
82. Asfar P, Meziani F, Hamel JF, et al. High versus low blood-pressure target in patients with septic
shock. N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 24;370(17):1583-93. Abstract
83. Geller BJ, Sinha SS, Kapur NK, et al. Escalating and de-escalating temporary mechanical circulatory
support in cardiogenic shock: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2022 Aug 9;146(6):e50-68.  Full text   Abstract
84. Hochman JS, Sleeper LA, Webb JG, et al; SHOCK Investigators. Early revascularization and
long-term survival in cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2006 Jun
7;295(21):2511-5.  Full text   Abstract
85. Ahmad Y, Sen S, Shun-Shin MJ, et al. Intra-aortic balloon pump therapy for acute myocardial
infarction: a meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 2015 Jun;175(6):931-9. Abstract
86. Unverzagt S, Buerke M, de Waha A, et al. Intra-aortic balloon pump counterpulsation (IABP) for
myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015 Mar 27;
(3):CD007398.  Full text   Abstract
87. Zheng XY, Wang Y, Chen Y, et al. The effectiveness of intra-aortic balloon pump for myocardial
infarction in patients with or without cardiogenic shock: a meta-analysis and systematic review. BMC
Cardiovasc Disord. 2016 Jul 8;16(1):148.  Full text   Abstract
88. Adler Y, Charron P. The 2015 ESC Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of pericardial
diseases. Eur Heart J. 2015 Nov 7;36(42):2873-4.  Full text   Abstract
89. Rhodes A, Phillips G, Beale R, et al. The Surviving Sepsis Campaign bundles and outcome: results
from the International Multicentre Prevalence Study on Sepsis (the IMPreSS study). Intensive Care
Med. 2015 Sep;41(9):1620-8. Abstract
90. Levy MM, Rhodes A, Phillips GS, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: association between performance
metrics and outcomes in a 7.5-year study. Intensive Care Med. 2014 Nov;40(11):1623-33.  Full text  
Abstract
91. Seymour CW, Gesten F, Prescott HC, et al. Time to treatment and mortality during mandated
emergency care for sepsis. N Engl J Med. 2017 Jun 8;376(23):2235-44.  Full text   Abstract
92. Ker K, Roberts I, Shakur H, et al. Antifibrinolytic drugs for acute traumatic injury. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 2015 May 9;(5):CD004896.  Full text   Abstract
93. Vahdatpour C, Collins D, Goldberg S. Cardiogenic shock. J Am Heart Assoc. 2019 Apr
16;8(8):e011991.  Full text   Abstract
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Shock References
REFERENCES
94. Werdan K, Buerke M, Geppert A, et al. Infarction-related cardiogenic shock- diagnosis, monitoring
and therapy–a German-Austrian S3 guideline. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2021 Feb 12;118(6):88-95.  Full text  
Abstract
95. Kusminsky RE. Complications of central venous catheterization. J Am Coll Surg. 2007
Apr;204(4):681-96. Abstract
96. McGee DC, Gould MK. Preventing complications of central venous catheterization. N Engl J Med.
2003 Mar 20;348(12):1123-33.  Full text   Abstract
97. Smith RN, Nolan JP. Central venous catheters. BMJ. 2013 Nov 11;347:f6570.  Full text   Abstract
98. Reich DL. Monitoring in anesthesia and perioperative care. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press;
2011.
99. Abbott Northwestern Hospital Internal Medicine Residency. Internal jugular central venous line. 2022
[internet publication].  Full text
100. Bishop L, Dougherty L, Bodenham A, et al. Guidelines on the insertion and management of central
venous access devices in adults. Int J Lab Hematol. 2007 Aug;29(4):261-78. Abstract
101. Practice guidelines for central venous access 2020: an updated report by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Central Venous Access. Anesthesiology. 2020 Jan;132(1):8-43.  Full
text   Abstract
102. Fletcher SJ, Bodenham AR. Safe placement of central venous catheters: where should the tip of the
catheter lie? Br J Anaesth. 2000 Aug;85(2):188-91. Abstract
103. Gibson F, Bodenham A. Misplaced central venous catheters: applied anatomy and practical
management. Br J Anaesth. 2013 Mar;110(3):333-46.  Full text   Abstract
104. Schuster M, Nave H, Piepenbrock S, et al. The carina as a landmark in central venous catheter
placement. Br J Anaesth. 2000 Aug;85(2):192-4. Abstract
105. Webster J, Osborne S, Rickard CM, et al. Clinically-indicated replacement versus routine replacement
of peripheral venous catheters. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Jan 23;(1):CD007798.  Full text  
Abstract
106. Royal College of Nursing. Catheter care: RCN guidance for health care professionals. Jul 2021
[internet publication].  Full text
107. Royal College of Nursing. Catheter care: guidance for health care professionals. Jul 2021 [internet
publication].  Full text
108. Calder I, Pearce A, eds. Core topics in airway management. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press; 2011.
109. Soar J, Böttiger BW, Carli P, et al. European Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Adult advanced
life support. Resuscitation. 2021 Apr;161:115-51. Abstract
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Shock References
110. Konstantinides SV, Barco S, Lankeit M, et al. Management of pulmonary embolism: an update. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2016 Mar 1;67(8):976-90.  Full text   Abstract
111. Kearon C, Akl EA, Ornelas J, et al. Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: CHEST guideline and
expert panel report. Chest. 2016 Feb;149(2):315-52.  Full text   Abstract
112. Schierhout G, Roberts I. Fluid resuscitation with colloid or crystalloid solutions in critically ill patients: a
systematic review of randomised trials. BMJ. 1998 Mar 28;316(7136):961-4.  Full text   Abstract
113. Choi PT, Yip G, Quinonez LG, Cook DJ. Crystalloids vs. colloids in fluid resuscitation: a systematic
review. Crit Care Med. 1999 Jan;27(1):200-10. Abstract
114. Akech S, Ledermann H, Maitland K. Choice of fluids for resuscitation in children with severe infection
and shock: systematic review. BMJ. 2010 Sep 2;341:c4416.  Full text   Abstract
115. Caironi P, Tognoni G, Masson S, et al. Albumin replacement in patients with severe sepsis or septic
shock. N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 10;370(15):1412-21.  Full text   Abstract
116. Zampieri FG, Machado FR, Biondi RS, et al. Effect of intravenous fluid treatment with a balanced
solution vs 0.9% saline solution on mortality in critically ill patients: the BaSICS randomized clinical
trial. JAMA. 2021 Aug 10;326(9):1-12.  Full text   Abstract
117. Zarychanski R, Abou-Setta AM, Turgeon AF, et al. Association of hydroxyethyl starch administration
with mortality and acute kidney injury in critically ill patients requiring volume resuscitation: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA. 2013 Feb 20;309(7):678-88.  Full text   Abstract
118. Gayet-Ageron A, Prieto-Merino D, Ker K, et al. Effect of treatment delay on the effectiveness and
safety of antifibrinolytics in acute severe haemorrhage: a meta-analysis of individual patient-level data
from 40 138 bleeding patients. Lancet. 2018 Jan 13;391(10116):125-32.  Full text   Abstract
119. Schmidt M, Burrell A, Roberts L, et al. Predicting survival after ECMO for refractory cardiogenic shock:
the survival after veno-arterial-ECMO (SAVE)-score. Eur Heart J. 2015 Sep 1;36(33):2246-56.  Full
text   Abstract
120. Ouweneel DM, Schotborgh JV, Limpens J, et al. Extracorporeal life support during cardiac
arrest and cardiogenic shock: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Intensive Care Med. 2016
Dec;42(12):1922-34.  Full text   Abstract
121. Chakaramakkil MJ, Sivathasan C. ECMO and Short-term support for cardiogenic shock in heart
failure. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2018 Aug 16;20(10):87. Abstract
122. Chang T, Tu YK, Lee CT, et al. Effects of polymyxin B hemoperfusion on mortality in patients with
severe sepsis and septic shock: a systemic review, meta-analysis update, and disease severity
subgroup meta-analysis. Crit Care Med. 2017 Aug;45(8):e858-64.  Full text   Abstract
123. Dellinger RP, Bagshaw SM, Antonelli M, et al. Effect of targeted polymyxin B hemoperfusion on 28-
day mortality in patients with septic shock and elevated endotoxin level: the EUPHRATES randomized
clinical trial. JAMA. 2018 Oct 9;320(14):1455-63. Abstract
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Shock References
REFERENCES
124. Plurad DS, Chiu W, Raja AS, et al. Monitoring modalities and assessment of fluid status: a practice
management guideline from the Eastern Association for the Surgery of Trauma. J Trauma Acute Care
Surg. 2018 Jan;84(1):37-49.  Full text   Abstract
125. Resuscitation Council UK. Emergency treatment of anaphylaxis: guidelines for healthcare providers.
May 2021 [internet publication].  Full text
126. Paul M, Dickstein Y, Raz-Pasteur A. Antibiotic de-escalation for bloodstream infections and
pneumonia: systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2016 Dec;22(12):960-7.
Abstract
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Shock Disclaimer
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Feb 25, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version
of the topics can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is
subject to our disclaimer. © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Contributors:
// Expert Advisers:
Samuel J. Stratton, MD, MPH
Professor
Fielding School of Public Health, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, Deputy Health
Officer, Orange County Health Care Agency, Health Disaster Management/Emergency Medical Services,
Santa Ana, CA
DISCLOSURES: SJS declares that he has no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Patrick Nee, FRCP, FRCS, FCEM
Consultant in Accident & Emergency Medicine
St Helens & Knowsley Hospitals NHS Trust, Whiston Hospital, Prescot, UK
DISCLOSURES: PN declares that he has no competing interests.
James Brown, MD, MMM
Vice-Chair and Program Director
Wright State University Department of Emergency Medicine, Dayton, OH
DISCLOSURES: JB declares that he has no competing interests.
