# Sustained ventricular tachycardias

=== Page 1 ===
Sustained ventricular
tachycardias
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Dec 20, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  5
Epidemiology  5
Etiology  5
Pathophysiology  5
Classification  6
Case history  9
Diagnosis  11
Approach  11
History and exam  15
Risk factors  16
Tests  20
Differentials  22
Criteria  23
Screening  23
Management  25
Approach  25
Treatment algorithm overview  30
Treatment algorithm  32
Emerging  46
Primary prevention  46
Secondary prevention  47
Patient discussions  47
Follow up  48
Monitoring  48
Complications  49
Prognosis  49
Guidelines  51
Diagnostic guidelines  51
Treatment guidelines  52
Online resources  54
References  55
Images  63
Disclaimer  66
=== Page 3 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Overview
Summary
ECG findings for sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) include wide QRS complex (duration >120
milliseconds) at a rate greater than 100 bpm.
Patients may have a normal cardiac output or may be hemodynamically compromised during episodes of VT.
Presence or absence of symptoms does not reliably differentiate VT from supraventricular tachycardia.
Torsades de pointes is a polymorphic VT with a characteristic twisting morphology occurring in the setting of
QT interval prolongation.
Sustained VT is usually observed in ischemic and nonischemic cardiomyopathy, but idiopathic VT may also
be observed in patients without structural heart disease.
Among patients with prior myocardial infarction or nonischemic cardiomyopathy, VT is usually due to reentry
involving regions of slowed conduction adjacent to scar.
Owing to the unpredictable and life-threatening nature of most etiologies of sustained VT, prophylactic
implantable cardioverter defibrillator implantation is recommended in high-risk patients.
Definition
Sustained VT is a ventricular rhythm faster than 100 bpm typically lasting at least 30 seconds or requiring
termination earlier due to hemodynamic instability. VT is defined as a wide complex tachycardia (QRS 120
milliseconds or greater) that originates from one of the ventricles, and is not due to aberrant conduction
(e.g., from bundle branch block), at a rate of 100 bpm or greater. "Idiopathic" VT occurs in the absence of
apparent structural heart disease (e.g., prior myocardial infarction, active ischemia, cardiomyopathy, valvular
disease, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, cardiac sarcoid, left ventricular noncompaction,
or other disorders of the myocardium), known channelopathy (e.g., long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome,
catecholaminergic polymorphic VT, short QT syndrome), drug toxicity, or electrolyte imbalance. VT can be
described as monomorphic or polymorphic. Torsades de pointes is a polymorphic VT with a characteristic
twisting morphology occurring in the setting of QT interval prolongation. Sustained VT often results in
hypotension and symptoms of weakness, syncope, or palpitations; however, the arrhythmia may be present
in patients who are asymptomatic and normotensive.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Overview
OVERVIEW
Sustained (monomorphic) ventricular tachycardia
From the collection of Prof Sei Iwai; used with permission
Torsades de pointes
From the collections of Dr Kenneth Stein and Dr Richard Keating; used with permission
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Theory
Epidemiology
Approximately 230,000 to 350,000 sudden deaths occur annually in the US. Another 300,000 out-of-
hospital cardiac arrests occur annually in Europe, accounting for 10% to 20% of all deaths.[1] Furthermore,
approximately 90% of sudden deaths are cardiac in origin, and the vast majority are due to ventricular
tachycardia (VT) or ventricular fibrillation. Population studies have estimated the incidence of fatal ventricular
arrhythmias in the general population to be 54 per 100,000 people; this risk increases with age, with the
presence of risk factors for coronary artery disease, and with the presence of structural heart disease, such
as left ventricular dysfunction or scar from prior myocardial infarction. Some studies suggest that women
have a lower incidence of sudden cardiac death compared to men and are less likely to have spontaneous or
inducible VT. However, women have longer QT intervals than men and are more likely to manifest torsades
de pointes (whether drug-induced or due to congenital long QT syndrome) than men.[2]
Etiology
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is usually observed in the setting of ischemic heart disease or underlying
nonischemic cardiomyopathy, although it may also be observed in patients without structural heart disease
(idiopathic VT). Ischemia and coronary artery disease (CAD) are the most common etiologies of VT around
the world, especially among North Americans and Europeans. Across the developing world, infectious and
other forms of nonischemic cardiomyopathy may also play a significant role in the etiology of ventricular
arrhythmias (e.g., Chagas disease in Central America).[3]
Other forms of structural heart disease, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy, and anomalous coronary arteries are also associated with ventricular arrhythmias. At
the cellular level, congenital or acquired abnormalities in cardiac sodium channels (congenital long QT
syndrome, Brugada syndrome), potassium channels (long QT syndrome, short QT syndrome), and calcium
channels (catecholaminergic polymorphic VT) have been implicated as causes of VT and sudden death.
Mutations in cardiac anchoring proteins may also lead to the long QT syndrome.[4]
See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  and Long QT syndrome  for more information.
Environmental and/or physiologic stressors can unmask subclinical abnormalities that predispose to
sudden cardiac death. Pharmacogenetic variants exist that result in prolongation of the QT interval
with administration of certain drugs (an up-to-date list of drugs is available through research centers 
[CredibleMeds: Arizona Center for Education and Research on Therapeutics] (https://www.crediblemeds.org)
); catecholamine-sensitive VT may only arise during periods of heightened mental or physical stress. It is
estimated that 5% to 10% of sudden cardiac deaths occur in the absence of cardiomyopathy or CAD.[5]
Pathophysiology
Among patients with prior myocardial infarction or nonischemic cardiomyopathy, regions of slowed
conduction (usually adjacent to damaged myocardium or scar) are the substrate for reentrant arrhythmias.
Ventricular tachycardia (VT) may also arise from triggered activity due to early after-depolarizations (EADs)
leading to torsades de pointes, a polymorphic VT seen in the setting of a prolonged QT interval, or delayed
after-depolarizations (DADs), which are seen in idiopathic right ventricular outflow tract VT (or its variants,
from other locations) or catecholaminergic polymorphic VT.[6] EADs occur during phase 2 or 3 of the action
potential, whereas DADs occur during phase 4. When an EAD or DAD reaches a "threshold" potential, it
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Theory
THEORY
can result in triggering of another action potential. Enhanced automaticity of the ventricular tissue may also
produce a relatively slow VT called accelerated idioventricular rhythm, which generally follows a benign
course. This arrhythmia is frequently observed in the setting of acute ischemia or early after reperfusion.[7]
Classification
Ventricular tachycardia (VT)
Presence of a wide complex tachycardia (QRS 120 milliseconds or greater) at a rate of 100 bpm or greater.
Sustained VT
A ventricular rhythm faster than 100 bpm typically lasting at least 30 seconds or requiring termination due to
hemodynamic instability.
Sustained (monomorphic) ventricular tachycardia
From the collection of Prof Sei Iwai; used with permission
Nonsustained VT
A ventricular rhythm faster than 100 bpm lasting for at least 3 consecutive beats but terminating
spontaneously in less than 30 seconds, and not resulting in significant hemodynamic instability.
Polymorphic VT
Tachyarrhythmia with multiple different wide QRS complex (>120 milliseconds) morphologies arising from the
ventricles.
Monomorphic VT
Tachyarrhythmia with an organized, single-morphology QRS complex arising from one of the ventricles.
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Theory
Bidirectional VT
VT with a beat-to-beat alternation in QRS axis, classically seen in digitalis toxicity or catecholaminergic
polymorphic VT.
Hemodynamically stable VT
VT associated with a normal blood pressure and no symptoms due to hemodynamic compromise.
Hemodynamically unstable VT
VT associated with hypotension, signs of diminished cerebral perfusion (e.g., confusion, dizziness, syncope),
or signs of diminished coronary perfusion (e.g., angina, dyspnea).
Idiopathic VT
VT occurring in the absence of apparent structural heart disease (e.g., ischemia, prior infarction,
cardiomyopathy, valvular disease, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, sarcoid, left ventricular
noncompaction, or other disorders of the myocardium), known channelopathy (e.g., long QT syndrome,
Brugada syndrome, catecholaminergic polymorphic VT, short QT syndrome), drug toxicity, or electrolyte
imbalance.
Right ventricular outflow tract tachycardia
From the collection of Prof Sei Iwai; used with permission
Torsades de pointes (TdP)
A form of polymorphic VT with a characteristic twisting morphology occurring in the setting of QT interval
prolongation. TdP is initiated by an early after-depolarization and perpetuated by reentry.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Theory
THEORY
Torsades de pointes
From the collections of Dr Kenneth Stein and Dr Richard Keating; used with permission
Catecholaminergic polymorphic VT
Patients with this condition demonstrate cellular abnormalities of calcium handling, especially during periods
of sympathetic stimulation. Increased intracellular calcium predisposes the patients to develop VT.
Outflow tract VT
This form of "idiopathic" VT was originally described as arising from the right ventricular outflow tract, but
may also originate from other areas including the left ventricular outflow tract region (including the sinuses of
Valsalva, left fibrous trigone, left ventricular summit, and tricuspid and mitral annuli), and likely results from
cyclic adenosine monophosphate-mediated triggered activity; therefore, this form of VT is uniquely sensitive
to adenosine.
Fascicular VT
A common form of idiopathic VT arising from the left ventricle, with reentrant circuit partially involving the
Purkinje fibers, that is characteristically sensitive to verapamil.
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Theory
Case history
Case history #1
A 65-year-old man has a history of prior anterior wall myocardial infarction that occurred 2 years ago,
complicated by severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction. While walking to the store, he suddenly
became aware of palpitations, diaphoresis, dizziness, and a sense of overwhelming malaise. One minute
later, he turned gray, lost consciousness, and collapsed onto the floor. An ECG revealed sustained
monomorphic ventricular tachycardia at 150 bpm. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated and
the patient was cardioverted to sinus rhythm with a 200-J biphasic shock delivered from an external
defibrillator. The patient regained consciousness. There was no antecedent chest discomfort and cardiac
enzymes were negative after the event. Serum electrolytes were also normal. He received an implantable
cardioverter/defibrillator the next day.
Sustained (monomorphic) ventricular tachycardia
From the collection of Prof Sei Iwai; used with permission
Case history #2
A 30-year-old woman presented to her primary care physician complaining of recurrent palpitations
during exercise. She had previously been healthy and was on no medications. She described a long
history of "skipped heart beats". Her doctor performed a treadmill exercise test, which demonstrated
good effort tolerance and no evidence of ischemia. During early recovery she developed sustained
monomorphic ventricular tachycardia with a left bundle branch block, inferior axis morphology. Cardiac
magnetic resonance imaging was performed that demonstrated normal biventricular function without
evidence of myocardial scar or fatty infiltration. Electrophysiologic testing was notable for inducible
adenosine-sensitive ventricular tachycardia (with identical morphology to the clinical tachycardia) that was
successfully ablated in a focal area in the right ventricular outflow tract.
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Theory
THEORY
Right ventricular outflow tract tachycardia
From the collection of Prof Sei Iwai; used with permission
Other presentations
Ventricular arrhythmias may present with a diverse spectrum of symptoms, including palpitations, chest
pain, and/or syncope, or may be asymptomatic. The type of symptom associated with the arrhythmia
depends on its duration, its rate, and whether or not it is associated with abnormal perfusion to the heart
or brain. Short-lived arrhythmias frequently are asymptomatic or manifest as brief palpitations, whereas
longer and more rapid arrhythmias are frequently associated with presyncope or syncope. Sudden
cardiac death is the most severe manifestation of ventricular arrhythmias; victims of sudden cardiac arrest
rarely survive without cardiopulmonary resuscitation and prompt electrical defibrillation.
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
Approach
The presenting symptoms and signs of ventricular tachycardia (VT) and supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs)
share considerable overlap. With the exception of signs of AV dissociation (e.g., cannon A waves) that
are essentially diagnostic of VT, few clinical findings can definitively identify the source of a wide complex
tachycardia.
History
A history of acute or prior myocardial infarction, or depressed left ventricular systolic dysfunction, strongly
favors a diagnosis of VT, but the converse is not necessarily true. Most symptoms associated with VT are
nonspecific in that they may also be present in patients with other conditions, including SVT. For example,
palpitations, dyspnea, chest discomfort, and nausea/diaphoresis are common in patients with VT, but
not pathognomonic. In addition, hypotension does not help to identify the origin of their arrhythmia; many
instances of well-tolerated VT and of poorly-tolerated SVT have been described. The patient may have a
history of syncope or presyncope.
A family history of sudden death, especially if at an early age, should alert the physician to seek potential
arrhythmogenic causes. Particularly if sudden death did not occur in the setting of underlying coronary
artery disease, the physician must pay even more careful attention to screen for primary electrical
abnormalities such as long QT syndrome and Brugada syndrome. In addition, imaging modalities
including echocardiography and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be considered, to
evaluate for evidence of conditions such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy, and left ventricular non-compaction.
Patients at high risk for VT who should be considered for prophylactic implantable cardioverter defibrillator
(ICD) include those with:
• Ischemic or nonischemic cardiomyopathy (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] ≤35%) and
mild-to-moderate congestive heart failure symptoms (New York Heart Association class II or III
symptoms). Those with severe heart failure (class IV) are at high risk as well, but have progressive
heart failure as a competing mode of death, and thus should be considered for ICD only if they are
candidates for cardiac resynchronization therapy
• Ischemic cardiomyopathy (LVEF ≤40%) with nonsustained VT and inducible sustained VT during
electrophysiologic testing
• Ischemic cardiomyopathy (LVEF ≤30% and New York Heart Association class I symptoms)
• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) with high-risk features such as family history of sudden death
from HCM; massive left ventricular hypertrophy (wall thickness ≥30 mm); unexplained syncope;
left ventricular systolic dysfunction; left ventricular apical aneurysm; extensive late gadolinium
enhancement on cardiovascular MRI; or frequent, longer, and faster runs of nonsustained VT.[8]
[9] Other clinical features that are utilized in calculating sudden cardiac death risk in HCM include
age, left atrial diameter, left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, and exercise blood pressure
response
• Congenital arrhythmia syndromes, including symptomatic patients with long QT syndrome,
Brugada syndrome, and catecholaminergic polymorphic VT with high-risk features.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Physical exam
The physical exam in a patient with suspected VT should include an assessment of the patient's level of
consciousness, airway stability, breathing, and circulatory support. This will help determine, once VT is
confirmed, whether to cardiovert the patient immediately or to attempt pharmacologic therapy first.
Signs of airway compromise may include stridor and/or apparent obstruction to breaths delivered during
rescue breathing.
Palpation of the carotid or femoral pulse may be necessary to determine the heart rate if the patient
is relatively hypotensive (e.g., systolic BP <90 mmHg), and can also provide a crude estimate of the
cardiac output (by noting the force of the pulse) if a blood pressure measurement cannot be immediately
obtained. Patients with a weak pulse and hypotension are classified as hemodynamically unstable, as
are patients with signs of diminished cerebral perfusion (e.g., lightheadedness, dizziness, diminished
responsiveness, or unconsciousness) or diminished coronary perfusion (e.g., chest discomfort, dyspnea).
Again, these findings do not always help distinguish VT from SVT.
ECG
The ECG is crucial to the diagnosis of a VT. VT is defined by the presence of a wide complex tachycardia
(QRS 120 milliseconds or greater) at a rate of 100 bpm or greater. However, it is important to recognize
that not all wide complex tachycardias are due to VT. When evaluating a patient with a wide complex
tachycardia it is essential to distinguish VT from SVT that conducts with aberrancy or with preexcitation,
as these conditions are managed very differently.
When available, review of the patient's baseline ECG provides important clues to determining the origin of
a wide complex arrhythmia.
Evidence supporting a diagnosis of an SVT includes:
• Preexisting preexcitation of a similar morphology to the wide complex arrhythmia; and/or
• Baseline bundle branch block that resembles the wide complex tachycardia.[22]
A stepwise approach has been proposed that uses 4 steps to differentiate VT from SVT with
aberrancy.[23] These steps are:
• 1. Absence of an RS complex in any precordial lead confirms diagnosis of VT
• 2. If RS complex is present in step 1, measure the QRS onset to nadir of S wave:
• a. R-to-S interval of >100 milliseconds confirms diagnosis of VT
• 3. If R-to-S interval is <100 milliseconds: examine ECG for atrioventricular (AV) dissociation. If
present, diagnosis is VT.
• 4. If no AV dissociation, examine QRS complex in V1 and V6:
• a. with right bundle branch block QRS morphology:
• i. in lead V1: Monophasic R, QR, or RS favors VT
ii. in lead V6: R/S ratio of <1 favors VT; QS, QR, or monophasic R favors VT
• b. with left bundle branch block QRS morphology:
• i. in either lead V1 or V2: R >30 milliseconds, R-to-S (nadir) interval of >60
milliseconds or a notched S wave favors VT
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
ii. in lead V6: QR or QS favors VT
• c. note: both V1/V2 and V6 criteria need to favor VT for the diagnosis to be made using this
step.
If none of the steps above favors VT, a diagnosis of SVT is made.
AV dissociation can manifest as dissociated P waves (usually best seen in lead V1) or the presence
of capture beats and fusion beats. Fusion beats are changes to the QRS complex that arise when the
native rhythm competes or fuses with a cycle of VT. The fusion beat demonstrates a distinct morphology
from that of the other QRS complexes in an otherwise monomorphic VT and is intermediate between the
wide complexes and the patient's baseline QRS morphology. A capture beat is an ECG phenomenon
characterized by a narrow QRS complex that occurs during a run of VT; the capture beat results from a
sinus beat temporarily penetrating the VT circuit. The capture beat occurs at an earlier RR interval than
would otherwise be expected by the VT cycle length. When evaluating a patient with an undiagnosed
wide complex tachycardia, the presence of capture or fusion beats proves that the arrhythmia is VT and
not SVT with aberrancy.
Evidence that suggests the arrhythmia is more likely to be from the ventricle includes ventricular
premature contractions of similar morphology to the tachycardia present on the baseline ECG.[22]
ECG evidence of previous myocardial infarction also favors a diagnosis of VT.
Another algorithm using only lead aVR for differentiating VT from SVT has been reported, with superior
accuracy.[24] Lead aVR was analyzed for:
• 1. Presence of an initial R wave
• 2. Width of an initial r or q wave >40 milliseconds
• 3. Notching on the initial downstroke of a predominantly negative QRS complex
• 4. Ventricular activation-velocity ratio (vi/vt), where v is the vertical excursion recorded during the
initial (vi) and terminal (vt) 40 milliseconds of the QRS complex.
The finding of any of the above results in a diagnosis of VT.
Other ECG evidence supporting a diagnosis of VT includes:
• QRS duration: >140 milliseconds with right bundle branch block morphology, or QRS duration
>160 milliseconds with left bundle branch block morphology (these criteria do not apply to patients
treated with antiarrhythmic drugs).
• The presence of a right superior axis or left bundle branch block morphology and any right
axis. The absence of extreme axis deviation does not imply a supraventricular origin of the
tachycardia.[25]
In 2022, another simple algorithm was published, called the Basel algorithm. The Basel algorithm
demonstrated high sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy in diagnosing VT using the 12-lead ECG and
history. VT was diagnosed in the presence of at least two of the following criteria: 1) clinical high-
risk features (i.e., history of myocardial infarction, or history of congestive heart failure with ejection
fraction 35% or less, or in the presence of an ICD or biventricular ICD); 2) lead II time to first peak >40
milliseconds; and 3) lead aVR time to first peak >40 milliseconds. If zero or one criterion was met, then
the diagnosis was SVT.[26]
The baseline ECG should also be examined carefully for evidence of:
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
• QT interval prolongation
Prolonged QT: QTc 510 ms (HR 69 and QT 476)
From the collection of Prof Sei Iwai; used with permission
• Brugada syndrome: a disorder characterized by cardiac conduction abnormalities, which leads to a
characteristic J-point elevation and downward-sloping ST segment elevation in the right precordial
leads that can lead to sudden death due to polymorphic VT. A mutation in the SCN5A (sodium
channel) gene has been implicated, but it is present in only a minority of patients. SCN10A has
also been identified as a major susceptibility gene for Brugada syndrome.[12]
• Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC): a genetic disorder characterized by
VT, sudden death, and progressive heart failure. In this disease, various regions of the right
(and occasionally the left) ventricular muscle are replaced by deposition of fat and fibrotic tissue.
Patients with ARVC frequently manifest right ventricular conduction delay on ECG; the finding of
an epsilon wave in lead V1 is a specific, although not sensitive, sign for the disease. An epsilon
wave represents late activation of a region of the ventricular myocardium, with delay being due to
the presence of fatty infiltration and fibrosis.
Although it is tempting to imagine that the rate of the tachycardia suggests whether or not it is from
the ventricle, the tachycardia rate is not helpful in diagnosing the location of the tachycardia. Likewise,
the regularity of the tachycardia generally is not helpful to classify its origin, although gross irregularity
suggests the possibility of atrial fibrillation with aberrancy or preexcitation.
Electrolytes and cardiac enzymes
Electrolyte abnormalities (particularly hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia) may incite and/or contribute
to VT. When time and the patient's condition permit, blood electrolytes should be investigated and any
abnormalities of these electrolytes should be corrected.
In situations where ischemia or infarction is the suspected mechanism of the VT, myocardial biomarker
assays (especially troponin) provide useful confirmatory information.
Imaging studies
Given the widely varying prognosis and management strategies for idiopathic VT and VT associated
with structural heart disease, it is crucial to establish the presence or absence of structural heart disease
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
in a patient presenting with VT. Echocardiogram is an efficient initial way to determine the presence or
absence of structural heart disease in addition to quantifying systolic function.
In patients suspected of having arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, cardiac MRI is
indicated to evaluate for the presence of fibrofatty infiltration of the right ventricle and for right ventricular
dysfunction.
Stress testing and cardiac catheterization
Stress testing and/or cardiac catheterization should be considered to establish the presence of coronary
artery disease (CAD), to exclude the possibility of asymptomatic/silent ischemia, especially among
patients with risk factors for CAD.
In patients suspected of having the inherited condition catecholaminergic polymorphic VT, diagnosis can
be made based on the presence of bidirectional or polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias under conditions
of increased sympathetic activity (e.g., following stress test) in young patients who otherwise have
structurally normal hearts and normal baseline ECGs.[27] Diagnosis can also be made based on genetic
testing for mutations in the genes encoding the cardiac ryanodine-calcium release channel (RyR2) and, in
some patients, mutations in the genes encoding cardiac calsequestrin (CASQ2).[16] [17]
Electrophysiologic (EP) testing
The determination of which patients would benefit from an invasive EP study is made in consultation with
an electrophysiologist.[7] It may be required to distinguish VT from SVT with aberrancy in cases where the
surface ECG cannot establish a diagnosis. The EP study may also be used to establish the mechanism of
VT in patients with structurally normal hearts, and in patients with left ventricular ejection fraction >35% or
with unexplained syncope.[28] An EP study may be helpful in such cases in determining whether or not a
given patient would benefit from a prophylactic ICD.[7]
Genetic testing
Genetic testing is available for inherited cardiovascular diseases including long QT syndrome, short QT
syndrome, Brugada syndrome, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and catecholaminergic polymorphic VT.[16]
[17] Consultation with a medical geneticist is useful when deciding which patients should undergo genetic
testing.[16] [17] Provision of genetic counseling is an essential part of care for any patients who agree to
genetic testing.[16] [17]
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
coronary artery disease (common)
• Ventricular fibrillation is common during active ischemia; chronic coronary disease leads to scar
formation, which increases risk of ventricular tachycardia.
tachycardia (common)
• Essential to the diagnosis by definition.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
hypotension (common)
• Degree of hypotension will depend on the rate and duration of the tachycardia and will be an indication
of reduced cardiac output.
Other diagnostic factors
weak pulse (common)
• Palpation of the carotid or femoral pulse provides useful information regarding the heart rate
(frequency of the pulse in bpm) and cardiac output (force of the pulse), which, if reduced, may be
revealed by a weak pulse.
syncope (common)
• Frequently observed in patients with ventricular tachycardia, due to cerebral hypoperfusion from
hypotension; however this is nonspecific.
presyncope (common)
• Frequently progresses to syncope.
airway compromise (common)
• This may include stridor and/or apparent obstruction to breaths delivered during rescue breathing.
impaired consciousness (common)
• Unconsciousness is a sign of diminished cerebral perfusion in a hemodynamically unstable patient. An
alert patient with a normal blood pressure would be considered hemodynamically stable.
lightheadedness (common)
• Sign of diminished cerebral perfusion in a hemodynamically unstable patient.
dizziness (common)
• Sign of diminished cerebral perfusion in a hemodynamically unstable patient.
diminished responsiveness (common)
• Sign of diminished cerebral perfusion in a hemodynamically unstable patient.
chest discomfort (common)
• Symptom of inadequate coronary perfusion.
dyspnea (common)
• Symptom of inadequate coronary perfusion, often with resultant left ventricular dysfunction or mitral
regurgitation.
asymptomatic (uncommon)
• Ventricular tachycardia does not always cause symptoms.
Risk factors
Strong
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
coronary artery disease
• Coronary artery disease creates ischemia in myocardial tissue. In the long term, myocardial infarction
leads to ventricular scarring, with areas of delayed electrical conduction along the border zone of the
scar, as well as within the scar, that are the substrate for reentrant circuits.
acute myocardial infarction
• Acute ischemia facilitates arrhythmias due to three electrophysiologic mechanisms: reentry, triggered
activity, and automaticity.
left ventricular systolic dysfunction
• Systolic dysfunction, regardless of the cause, is strongly associated with ventricular arrhythmias.
Scars in the ventricle create areas of slowed electrical conduction and set up the substrate necessary
for reentrant ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation. These scars can be created by prior
myocardial infarction (ischemic cardiomyopathy) or abnormal myocardial fibrosis (nonischemic
cardiomyopathy).[7]
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), a genetic condition characterized by cellular disarray of the
myocardium that results in asymmetric thickening of the ventricle, has been linked to increased risk
of developing ventricular arrhythmias. The phenotypic expression of this disorder is highly variable,
and the risk of ventricular arrhythmia varies among individuals. In general, the following clinical risk
factors are considered as high risk and merit consideration of prophylactic implantable cardioverter-
defibrillator placement: 1) family history of sudden death from HCM; 2) massive left ventricular
hypertrophy (wall thickness ≥30 mm); 3) unexplained syncope; 4) left ventricular systolic dysfunction;
5) left ventricular apical aneurysm; 6) extensive late gadolinium enhancement on cardiovascular
magnetic resonance imaging; and 7) nonsustained ventricular tachycardia on ambulatory monitor.[8][9]
• See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  for more information.
long QT syndrome
• Long QT syndrome (LQTS) represents a genetic disorder that manifests as a prolongation of
the corrected QT interval on the ECG. The clinical prognosis varies according to the phenotypic
manifestation of the genetic defect. Multiple subtypes of LQTS have been described; patients are
at increased risk of experiencing a particular form of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia known as
torsades de pointes (TdP). While there are over a dozen mutations that are known to cause LQTS,
approximately 75% of patients with clinically certain LQTS diagnosis have one of three mutations
(LQT1-3). Typically, patients with LQTS type 1 (LQT1) are at increased risk of developing TdP during
periods of physical exertion. LQTS type 2 (LQT2) is often characterized by initiation of TdP following
a startle reflex or a period of heightened emotional stress. Patients with LQTS type 3 (LQT3) tend
to develop arrhythmias during sleep.[10] Beta-blocker medications have been shown to reduce the
arrhythmia burden in LQTS, except with LQT3 patients. Implantable cardioverter defibrillators are
recommended for patients with high-risk features.[11]
• See Long QT syndrome  for more information.
short QT syndrome
• Syndrome manifested by a short QT interval (QTc generally 330 milliseconds or less, but can be
diagnosed with QTc <360 milliseconds in presence of certain clinical features) and an increased risk of
sudden death due to polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Brugada syndrome
• Brugada syndrome is a disorder of myocardial sodium channels, which leads to a characteristic J point
elevation and downward-sloping ST segment elevation in the right precordial leads due to regional
inhomogeneities in ventricular repolarization, and results in an increased risk of sudden death due
to polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation. A mutation in the SCN5A (sodium
channel) gene has been implicated, but is present in only a minority of patients. SCN10A has also
been identified as a major susceptibility gene for Brugada syndrome.[12] Three patterns of ECG
abnormalities have been described. Type I pattern consists of J point elevation with a “coved” ST
segment elevation of at least 2 mm, with negative T wave; type II pattern has ST segment elevation
of at least 2 mm and “saddleback” appearance, and type III pattern has features of either type I
or II pattern, but ST elevation of under 2 mm. Only type I pattern is considered diagnostic. Risk
factors for sudden death in patients with Brugada pattern include a history of unexplained syncope
and spontaneous type I Brugada pattern on ECG. Use of electrophysiologic testing to determine
susceptibility to sudden death has been somewhat controversial. However, inducibility of ventricular
fibrillation does not appear to help in risk stratification.[13]
• Drug challenges with various antiarrhythmic medications (procainamide, flecainide, or ajmaline) can
be helpful to diagnose borderline cases of Brugada syndrome; positive response to the drug challenge
results in increased ST elevation of the right precordial leads.[14]
ventricular pre-excitation
• ECG abnormality notable for slurring of the initial portion of the R wave due to an abnormal AV
conduction pathway, which activates (“pre-excites”) a portion of the ventricular myocardium before
the normal electrical impulse conducts down the AV node/His-Purkinje system. Pre-excitation is
most commonly seen in patients with an accessory pathway due to Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW)
pattern or syndrome. Patients with WPW that are capable of rapid conduction down the accessory
pathway (i.e., from atria to ventricles) are at risk of having atrial fibrillation with rapid conduction to
the ventricles degenerating into ventricular fibrillation. This can manifest as an irregular rhythm with
varying, but wide, QRS complexes. Importantly, patients with accessory pathways can have antidromic
reciprocating tachycardia (ART), which is a macroreentrant circuit involving antegrade conduction
down the accessory pathway, and retrograde conduction up the AV node. This form of supraventricular
tachycardia is indistinguishable from ventricular tachycardia arising from the base of the ventricles,
since activation of the ventricles originates at the location of the accessory pathway in ART.
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
• Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is a genetic disorder characterized by
progressive heart failure, ventricular arrhythmias, and sudden death. In this disease, various regions
of the right (and less commonly left) ventricular muscle are replaced by deposition of fat and fibrotic
tissue. The disease may be transmitted in an autosomal-dominant fashion and in some families is
related to mutations in the genes encoding desmosomal proteins (plakoglobin, desmoplakin, and
plakophilin). Early symptoms include syncope and palpitations (especially during periods of heavy
exertion); as the disease progresses, symptoms of right ventricular failure become more prominent.
In advanced presentations, patients may develop biventricular failure. Patients with ARVC frequently
manifest interventricular conduction delays on ECG; the finding of an epsilon wave in lead V1 is a
specific sign for the disease, and represents late activation of a portion of the right ventricle. A Holter
monitor typically reveals left bundle branch block-morphology premature ventricular contractions
(often of more than one ECG morphology), or nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. Echocardiogram
and/or right ventricular angiography may reveal right ventricular dilation, regional dyskinesis, and/or
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
reduced systolic function. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging may reveal fibrofatty infiltration of the
right ventricular myocardium.[4] [18] Although the original descriptions characterized predominantly
RV involvement, variants with earlier and/or greater left ventricular involvement have been reported,
leading to the use of the term “arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy” as a broader term to include all
phenotypes.
electrolyte imbalance
• Electrolyte abnormalities (particularly hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia) may incite and/or contribute
to ventricular tachycardia.
drug toxicity
• Pharmacogenetic variants exist that result in prolongation of the QT interval with administration of
certain drugs, including macrolide antibiotics, chlorpromazine, haloperidol, and domperidone. An
up-to-date list of drugs is available through research centers.  [CredibleMeds: Arizona Center for
Education and Research on Therapeutics] (https://www.crediblemeds.org)
Chagas disease and other cardiomyopathies
• Across the developing world, infectious and other forms of nonischemic cardiomyopathy may also play
a significant role in the etiology of ventricular arrhythmias (e.g., Chagas disease in Central America).[3]
Weak
sleep-disordered breathing (SDB)
• Impaired baroreflex mechanisms in SDB may increase the incidence of VT and sudden cardiac death
through increased sympathetic activation and parasympathetic withdrawal.[15]
family history of sudden death
• A family history of sudden death should alert the physician to seek potential arrhythmogenic causes.
Genetic testing is available for inherited cardiovascular diseases including long QT syndrome,
Brugada syndrome, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia.[16] [17]
mental or physical stress
• Catecholamine-sensitive ventricular tachycardia (VT) may only arise during periods of heightened
mental or physical stress. Examples include torsade de pointes with certain gene mutations in long QT
syndrome, catecholaminergic VT, VT associated with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy,
and even idiopathic VT (e.g., right ventricular outflow tract VT).
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
ECG
• Required to establish diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia. Clinician
should look for atrioventricular dissociation, fusion/capture beats, and
other criteria for ventricular tachycardia.
• The absence of extreme axis deviation does not imply a
supraventricular origin of the tachycardia.[25]
wide complex tachycardia
(QRS 120 milliseconds
or greater) at a rate of
100 bpm or greater;
may show presence
of atrioventricular
dissociation, previous
myocardial infarction;
QRS duration: >140
milliseconds with
right bundle branch
block morphology,
or QRS duration >160
milliseconds with left
bundle branch block
morphology (this does
not apply to patients on
antiarrhythmic drugs);
right superior axis or
left bundle branch block
morphology and any right
axis; baseline ECG may
demonstrate QT interval
prolongation or evidence
of Brugada syndrome
or arrhythmogenic
right ventricular
cardiomyopathy
transthoracic echocardiogram
• Noninvasive test that can quickly reveal contributory and complicating
mechanical and structural problems.
depressed left
ventricular function,
wall motion abnormality,
other evidence of
structural heart
disease, or hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
electrolytes
• Serves as baseline measurement and may reveal contributory factors
to arrhythmia.
hypokalemia and
hypomagnesemia
frequently associated with
torsades de pointes
troponin I
• Ischemia is a reversible cause of ventricular tachycardia and should
be sought promptly to allow for revascularization.
elevated in myocardial
infarction
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
Other tests to consider
Test Result
cardiac catheterization
• May be an appropriate early test for patients, especially those
presenting with ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation in the
setting of acute myocardial infarction.
coronary artery
obstruction/occlusion
cardiac MRI
• Particularly useful in establishing the presence of arrhythmogenic
right ventricular cardiomyopathy.
scar, fibrofatty infiltration
of myocardium, other
evidence of infiltrative
cardiomyopathy
electrophysiologic (EP) study
• May be required to distinguish ventricular tachycardia (VT) from
supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) with aberrancy in cases where the
surface ECG cannot establish a diagnosis. The EP study may also
be used to establish the mechanism of VT in patients with structurally
normal hearts, and in patients with left ventricular ejection fraction
>35% or with unexplained syncope.[28] An EP study may be helpful
in such cases in determining whether or not a given patient would
benefit from a prophylactic implantable cardioverter defibrillator.[7]
distinguishes VT from
SVT with aberrancy;
establishes mechanism
of VT in patients with an
apparently structurally
normal heart; inducible
sustained monomorphic
VT in patients with
coronary artery disease
and mild/moderate left
ventricular dysfunction
genetic testing
• Determines underlying genetic factors associated with a number
of inherited cardiovascular diseases. Consultation with a medical
geneticist is recommended. Genetic counseling for the patient is
essential.[16] [17]
mutations associated
with potentially
high risk of sudden
death, for example,
Brugada syndrome,
and catecholaminergic
polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Supraventricular
tachycardia with
aberrancy
• None. • ECG; electrophysiologic
study: failure to meet criteria
for ventricular tachycardia;
absence of fusion or
capture beats; absence of
atrioventricular dissociation.
Supraventricular
tachycardia with
preexcitation
• None. • ECG, electrophysiologic
study: failure to meet criteria
for ventricular tachycardia;
absence of fusion or
capture beats; absence of
atrioventricular dissociation.
Electrical artifact • None. • Evidence of underlying sinus
rhythm on ECG discernible
through electrical noise
(motion artifact).
• Evidence of arrhythmia
isolated to specific leads on
12-lead ECG (tremor).
Sepsis or fever • Elevated temperature,
malaise, rigors, symptoms of
underlying infection.
• ECG shows underlying sinus
rhythm or sinus tachycardia.
• Appropriate cultures may
show presence of infecting
agent.
Panic/hyperventilation • Anxiety or panic, fear
of imminent death,
paresthesiae, chest pain,
numbness, faintness,
dizziness, sweating.
• ECG shows underlying sinus
rhythm.
• Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scale anxiety
score >11.
Hyperthyroidism • Tremor, anxiety, weight loss
but good appetite, diarrhea,
eyelid retraction and lid lag,
fatigue, heat intolerance,
goiter.
• ECG shows underlying sinus
rhythm or atrial fibrillation.
• Elevated thyroxine/
triiodothyronine and low
thyroid-stimulating hormone
levels.
Acute hemorrhage • Low blood pressure,
abdominal pain with
hematemesis and/or melena,
hemorrhage from other sites,
history of likely cause of
blood loss: for example,
trauma or postoperative.
• ECG shows underlying sinus
tachycardia.
• Ultrasound or CT may show
internal bleeding source and/
or collection of blood.
Pheochromocytoma • Headache, sweating,
palpitations, fluctuating
hypertension, anxiety,
nausea, vomiting, weight
• ECG shows underlying sinus
tachycardia.
• Increased plasma
and 24-hour urine
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
loss, heat intolerance,
tremors, chest and
abdominal pain.
epinephrine/norepinephrine/
metanephrine levels.
• Glucagon stimulation test
positive.
• Clonidine suppression test
positive.
• CT, MRI, or m-
iodobenzylguanidine scans
show tumor in adrenal gland.
Pericarditis • Tachycardia and friction rub;
jugular venous distention
and pulsus paradoxus
indicate pericardial effusion
causing tamponade.
• ECG shows diffuse concave-
up ST-elevation, associated
PR depression.
• Chest x-ray may show
enlarged cardiac silhouette
(globular heart) if pericardial
effusion present.
• Echocardiogram may show
pericardial effusion.
Caffeine, alcohol,
amphetamine use
• History of recent use or high
intake.
• Tremor, agitation, signs of
intoxication.
• ECG shows underlying sinus
tachycardia.
Criteria
Pulseless ventricular tachycardia (VT)
• Hemodynamically unstable: patient unconscious with hypotension and undetectable pulse.
VT with a cardiac output
• Hemodynamically stable/well: an alert patient with normal blood pressure.
• Hemodynamically unstable/ill: patient with weak pulse and hypotension, signs of diminished cerebral
perfusion (lightheadedness, dizziness, diminished responsiveness, or unconsciousness) or diminished
coronary perfusion (chest discomfort, dyspnea).
Screening
Screening for potential causes of ventricular arrhythmias should focus on populations at increased risk of
developing the disorder and will allow the institution of primary prevention. The highest-risk patients include
those with left ventricular dysfunction (ischemic or nonischemic cardiomyopathy), heart failure symptoms,
congenital arrhythmia syndromes (e.g., long QT syndrome, short QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome,
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and arrhythmogenic
right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Invasive electrophysiologic testing may be useful in certain cases. An
implantable cardioverter defibrillator is the most important preventive/therapeutic intervention performed for
patients at high risk of developing a sustained ventricular arrhythmia.
See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  and Long QT syndrome  for more information.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
Approach
Avoidance of behavioral factors associated with coronary artery disease (CAD) and left ventricular
dysfunction is useful to prevent the most common causes of ventricular arrhythmia. Likewise, aggressive
management of conditions that predispose to CAD and myocardial infarction (MI) (e.g., hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus) would be expected to reduce the subsequent risk of ventricular tachycardia
(VT).
In special cases such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
(ARVC), and long QT syndrome type 1, patients should be counseled to avoid significant physical exertion.
See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  and Long QT syndrome  for more information.
It is important to distinguish ventricular arrhythmia patients with underlying structural heart disease from
those who have idiopathic VT, which is associated with a good prognosis, rarely progressing to cardiac
arrest.
Idiopathic VT (although defined as occurring in the absence of structural heart disease, known genetic
disorder, drug toxicity, or electrolyte imbalance) is identifiable by electrophysiologic (EP) testing. Therefore, in
the case of VTs, idiopathic VT refers to a specific subtype of tachycardias that can be defined by arrhythmia
mechanism. This is different from tachycardias with no identifiable cause, in which the patient would have no
signs of a definitive cause for the VT or signs of an idiopathic VT.
Treatment for identifiable reversible cause of VT such as
ischemia, MI, toxicity, drug overdose
In patients with a reversible cause of VT such as active ischemia, recent MI, or drug toxicity or overdose,
management includes treatment of the underlying cause of the VT in addition to the arrhythmia itself.[1]
Until the reversible cause of VT has been corrected, an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) should
not be considered.
Hemodynamically unstable sustained VT
Detailed discussion on CPR and defibrillation, in the advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) algorithm
for the management of hemodynamically unstable VT in the setting of cardiac arrest such as pulseless
VT and ventricular fibrillation (VF), is beyond the scope of this topic.[32][33] [34]  [American Heart
Association: guidelines for CPR and emergency cardiovascular care] (https://eccguidelines.heart.org/
index.php/circulation/cpr-ecc-guidelines-2)  See Cardiac arrest .
Cardioversion is essential for the acute treatment of patients with hemodynamically unstable VT
(symptomatic or severely hypotensive VT).[1] Left untreated, these conditions frequently culminate in
death; rapid recognition and initiation of appropriate treatment may provide the only hope for the patient's
survival.
Synchronized cardioversion should be considered before attempting antiarrhythmic drug therapy in
patients who have syncope, presyncope, and/or hypotension.
The antiarrhythmic medications amiodarone and lidocaine can be used as adjunctive therapy.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
Torsades de pointes
Torsades de pointes, a specific type of polymorphic VT characterized by a twisting appearance around
the baseline, occurs in the setting of QT prolongation due to either the congenital or the acquired forms of
the long QT syndrome. Torsades de pointes should be treated as any other form of VT according to the
ACLS protocol. If the patient is hemodynamically unstable, immediate defibrillation should be performed.
There should be special recognition of the fact that hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia are frequently
associated with torsades de pointes, and empiric administration of magnesium should be considered.
Offending drugs should be withdrawn and electrolyte deficiencies should be treated aggressively. An up-
to-date list of drugs is available through research centers.  [CredibleMeds: Arizona Center for Education
and Research on Therapeutics] (https://www.crediblemeds.org)  Intravenous magnesium sulfate should
be administered. Additionally, overdrive pacing and isoproterenol infusion may be useful adjunctively in
this arrhythmia as they reduce the QT interval.[33] [34]
Catecholaminergic polymorphic VT
Medical therapy for catecholaminergic polymorphic VT, an inherited arrhythmia syndrome with high risk
of VT, includes the use of beta-blockers for both acute and chronic treatment.[27] [35] ICD insertion is
needed in patients with recurrent syncope despite beta-blockers, or those who are survivors of cardiac
arrest. However, ICDs should not be implanted without concomitant beta-blocker therapy as ICD shocks
will increase catecholamine surge, potentially leading to a vicious cycle of ventricular arrhythmias and
ICD shocks. Left cardiac sympathetic denervation appears to be effective, but has only been tested on
small cohorts, and is not universally available.[36] In addition, flecainide, which acts to block the RyR2
channel, prevents RyR2-mediated premature calcium release and suppresses triggered beats. However,
there are limited data showing its effectiveness in humans.[37] [38] Other treatment strategies have been
proposed, including a stepwise addition of alternate treatment options, such as calcium-channel blockers
and flecainide, to beta-blockers in patients who do not respond sufficiently or who cannot tolerate beta-
blockers.[27]
Hemodynamically stable nonidiopathic sustained VT
Antiarrhythmic medications are useful in the acute management of VT that is asymptomatic and
associated with normal blood pressure. Before initiating antiarrhythmic drug therapy for a VT, it is
important to be confident in the diagnosis and to make sure that the patient is not experiencing
supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) with aberrant conduction. Conversely, the diagnosis of SVT with
aberrancy should also be made carefully, as certain medications (e.g., verapamil, diltiazem) can
exacerbate the clinical situation by worsening the patient’s hemodynamic status if the actual arrhythmia is
VT.
According to the American Heart Association (AHA), intravenous adenosine can be considered to aid in
treatment and diagnosis when the cause of the regular, monomorphic rhythm cannot be determined.[34]
Other antiarrhythmic drugs may also be considered in the acute management of stable VT. The AHA
recommends intravenous procainamide or intravenous amiodarone.[34] Intravenous procainamide has
been shown to be more efficacious than intravenous amiodarone in terminating wide complex tachycardia
(67% vs. 38%, respectively; P = 0.026), and was associated with fewer adverse events.[39] However,
procainamide may be more proarrhythmic and should be used with caution in the setting of baseline QT
prolongation.[34]
Patients not responsive to initial antiarrhythmic therapy:
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
• Synchronized electrical cardioversion is another important treatment for hemodynamically
tolerated sustained (monomorphic) VT. Among patients who fail an initial attempt at synchronized
cardioversion, antiarrhythmic medications such as amiodarone or lidocaine may be administered
prior to additional attempts at cardioversion
• Synchronized cardioversion should be considered before attempting antiarrhythmic drug therapy in
patients who have syncope, presyncope, frequent palpitations, or hypotension (particularly those
with symptoms of diminished cerebral perfusion), even if they have apparently stable hemodynamic
parameters.
Initial management of hemodynamically stable idiopathic VT
There are several distinct entities of VT that occur in the absence of structural heart disease. Idiopathic
VT occurs in the absence of apparent structural heart disease (e.g., ischemia, prior infarction,
cardiomyopathy, ARVC, left ventricular noncompaction, and valvular or other disorders of the
myocardium), known channelopathy (e.g., long QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, catecholaminergic
polymorphic VT, short QT syndrome), drug toxicity, or electrolyte imbalance. These VTs are; however,
identifiable through EP testing and response to certain medications.
Idiopathic VT requires specific treatment, and consultation with an electrophysiologist is recommended.
Specific types of idiopathic VT characteristically respond to specific medications, a feature that is useful
for diagnostic as well as therapeutic purposes. Idiopathic outflow tract VT (which typically arises from the
right ventricular outflow tract, but which may also arise from other regions including the left ventricular
outflow tract) demonstrates one of several characteristic ECG morphologies. This arrhythmia is due to
cyclic-AMP-mediated triggered activity that results in delayed after-depolarizations and can therefore be
terminated with a bolus of adenosine. Outflow tract tachycardia may also respond to beta-adrenergic
blockade, calcium-channel blockers, or to vagal maneuvers.
Fascicular VT, a common form of idiopathic VT due to a reentrant circuit involving part of either the
left anterior or left posterior fascicle, characteristically responds to verapamil, but the drug should be
only be used with extreme caution due to the risk of hypotension and hemodynamic collapse if given to
other forms of VT. Cases of idiopathic VT refractory to adenosine or verapamil can be treated with other
antiarrhythmic medications (lidocaine, amiodarone); if the arrhythmia persists, synchronized electrical
cardioversion should be considered.[34]
Earlier use of cardioversion may be warranted in patients who are highly symptomatic (particularly with
symptoms of diminished cerebral perfusion) despite apparently stable hemodynamics. Among patients
who fail an initial attempt at synchronized cardioversion, additional antiarrhythmic medications such as
amiodarone or lidocaine may be administered prior to additional attempts at cardioversion.
Subsequent management of hemodynamically stable idiopathic
VT
For patients with idiopathic VT and mild-to-moderate symptoms (rare palpitations that do not interfere with
daily activities), beta-blockers or calcium-channel blockers usually provide sufficient treatment. Catheter
ablation is also reasonable as first-line therapy in patients with mild-to-moderate symptoms who prefer not
to take medications.[40] It is a matter of patient preference in deciding between medications and ablation
in this setting.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
In patients with moderate-to-severe symptoms (syncope, presyncope, or frequent, disabling palpitations)
or with associated cardiomyopathy, catheter ablation of VT should be considered as first-line therapy.
Catheter ablation is also indicated in patients in whom beta-blockers and/or calcium-channel blockers are
ineffective or poorly tolerated.[40]
Antiarrhythmic agents, including class I drugs (mexiletine, flecainide, and propafenone) and class III
agents (amiodarone and sotalol) may be used in patients who fail therapy with beta-blockers and/or
calcium-channel blockers and who are not candidates for catheter ablation due to medical comorbidity
or reluctance to undergo the procedure, or in whom catheter ablation is ineffective.[41] In patients with
idiopathic VT, ICD therapy is not recommended as a first-line treatment.
Medication choice is usually based on individual patient/physician preference. In some cases, a beta-
blocker or calcium-channel blocker will suffice, whereas in other cases catheter ablation of the arrhythmia
is curative.[41]
Medications such as flecainide, sotalol, and amiodarone may be employed as second-line therapy for
patients with idiopathic VT who have refractory symptoms and who fail therapy with beta-blockers or
catheter ablation.
Patients at high risk for VT or with history of sustained VT/cardiac
arrest without identifiable reversible cause: ICD
ICD implantation is the recommended initial treatment/preventive measure for patients at high risk of
developing a malignant ventricular arrhythmia, for:
• High-risk patients who have not yet experienced a sustained arrhythmia (primary prevention)[42]
[43]
• Patients who have survived an episode of sustained VT or VF and who have no identifiable
reversible cause for VT/cardiac arrest.[44] [45] [46]
Patients at high risk for VT for which ICD implantation is the recommended initial treatment/preventive
measure include those with:
• Ischemic cardiomyopathy (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] ≤35%) and mild-to-moderate
congestive heart failure symptoms (New York Heart Association class II or III symptoms)
• Ischemic cardiomyopathy with LVEF ≤30%
• Ischemic cardiomyopathy (LVEF ≤40%) with nonsustained VT and inducible sustained VT during
EP testing
• Nonischemic cardiomyopathy (LVEF ≤35% and New York Heart Association class II or III
symptoms)
• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) with high-risk features such as family history of sudden death
from HCM; massive left ventricular hypertrophy (wall thickness ≥30 mm); unexplained syncope;
left ventricular systolic dysfunction; left ventricular apical aneurysm; extensive late gadolinium
enhancement on cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging; or frequent, longer, and faster runs
of nonsustained VT.[8][9] Other clinical features that are utilized in calculating sudden cardiac death
risk in HCM include age, left atrial diameter, left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, and exercise
blood pressure response.
• Congenital arrhythmia syndromes, including symptomatic patients with long QT syndrome and
Brugada syndrome.
ICDs are highly effective in terminating sustained ventricular arrhythmias. These devices provide a
continuous monitor for the cardiac rhythm and the capability of terminating VT by overdrive pacing and/
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
or cardioversion/defibrillation. Multiple clinical trials have shown the ICDs to be more effective than
antiarrhythmic medications in reducing total mortality for cardiac arrest survivors, especially in the
setting of coronary artery disease. It is understood that ICD programming can affect not only frequency
of ICD therapies (including antitachycardia pacing and ICD shocks) but also inappropriate therapies
(i.e., those for rhythms other than ventricular tachyarrhythmias) and mortality rates.[47] [48] It should
be emphasized that these trials excluded patients with reversible causes of cardiac arrest, including
toxic/metabolic abnormalities, trauma, and acute ischemia. ICD implantation is not indicated in such
cases when correction of the disorder is considered feasible and likely to substantially reduce the risk of
recurrence.
Although an invasive procedure, ICD implantation is associated with a procedural mortality of only 0.02%.
The long-term risks of ICD therapy include device malfunction, infection, and/or inappropriate shocks.
Risk factors for infection include comorbid conditions such as diabetes and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, as well as oral anticoagulation therapy and corticosteroid use. Measures such as antibiotic
prophylaxis and good patient education on wound care can help reduce risk.[49] ICD shocks can be
painful and if frequent may impair patient's quality of life.[44] [45] [46] [50]
Traditionally, ICDs have been implanted with a transvenous lead. However, a subcutaneous ICD, where
the ICD lead remains extravascular, is also an option. An approved version involves an ICD lead tunneled
subcutaneously near the inferior border of the left rib cage and then up along the sternum, with the ICD
generator located in the left axillary region.[19] Another extravascular ICD, involving a lead placed under
the sternum, is being investigated.[20]
All currently available ICDs are capable of responding to arrhythmias in a tiered fashion. Transvenous
ICDs are capable of antibradycardia pacing, antitachycardia pacing for VT, low-energy cardioversion for
VT, and high-energy defibrillation for VF. ICDs detect arrhythmias primarily on the basis of heart rate.
Thus, they will not intervene in the case of VT below the programmed rate and may inappropriately
intervene in the case of supraventricular arrhythmias with a rapid ventricular response.
Appropriate use guidelines are available with respect to ICD implantation for both primary and secondary
prevention, including use of cardiac resynchronization devices.[51] [52]
Adjunctive therapies for high-risk patients already implanted with
an ICD or for whom ICD therapy is not an option
Antiarrhythmic drugs may be useful as adjunctive therapies for high-risk patients already implanted
with an ICD or for whom ICD therapy is not an option.[7] However, it should be emphasized that with
the notable exception of beta-blockers, randomized trials have shown that currently available oral
antiarrhythmic drugs do not prolong life when used chronically in the treatment of life-threatening
ventricular arrhythmias and sudden death.[7] Some antiarrhythmic medications may not be appropriate for
patients with structural heart disease because they have negative inotropic properties and may increase
the risk of VT. It is important to be aware that amiodarone can increase defibrillation thresholds and,
therefore, potentially impair ICD function.[53]
Catheter ablation may also be used as a palliative measure in patients with structural heart disease
experiencing recurrent episodes of VT. Catheter ablation has also been shown to decrease appropriate
ICD therapies, including ICD shocks.[40] [54] [55]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Initial ( summary )
hemodynamically unstable
ventricular tachycardia with a pulse
1st synchronized cardioversion according to
advanced cardiac life support protocol +
treatment of reversible cause (if present)
adjunct antiarrhythmic medication
torsades de pointes
1st intravenous magnesium sulfate +
withdraw offending drugs + correct
electrolyte abnormalities
adjunct isoproterenol infusion
adjunct temporary or permanent pacing
catecholaminergic polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia
1st beta-blockers
adjunct implantable cardioverter defibrillator
Acute ( summary )
hemodynamically stable
nonidiopathic sustained ventricular
tachycardia
1st antiarrhythmic medications + treatment of
reversible cause (if present)
2nd synchronized cardioversion ±
antiarrhythmic medications
hemodynamically stable idiopathic
sustained ventricular tachycardia
1st intravenous antiarrhythmic medications
2nd synchronized cardioversion
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
Ongoing ( summary )
nonidiopathic: at high risk for
ventricular tachycardia or history of
sustained ventricular tachycardia/
cardiac arrest without identifiable
reversible cause
1st implantable cardioverter defibrillator
adjunct antiarrhythmic medication
2nd antiarrhythmic monotherapy
structural heart disease
with recurrent episodes of
ventricular tachycardia
plus catheter ablation
idiopathic ventricular tachycardia
1st specialist referral for ongoing
antiarrhythmic treatment
mild-to-moderate
symptoms (rare
palpitations that do
not interfere with daily
activities)
plus beta-blockers or calcium-channel blockers
or catheter ablation
moderate-to-severe
symptoms (syncope,
presyncope, or frequent,
disabling palpitations)
or associated
cardiomyopathy
plus catheter ablation
failure of beta-
blockers, calcium-
channel blockers, or
catheter ablation, or
noncandidates for
catheter ablation
plus class I or class III antiarrhythmic
medications
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Initial
hemodynamically unstable
ventricular tachycardia with a pulse
1st synchronized cardioversion according to
advanced cardiac life support protocol +
treatment of reversible cause (if present)
» Cardioversion is essential for the acute
treatment of hemodynamically unstable
ventricular tachycardia (VT) (symptomatic or
severely hypotensive VT).[1]
» Synchronized cardioversion should be
considered before attempting antiarrhythmic
drug therapy in patients who have syncope,
presyncope, frequent palpitations, or
hypotension (particularly those with symptoms of
diminished cerebral perfusion), even if they have
apparently stable hemodynamics.
» Cardioversion may be repeated as needed
until rhythm is controlled.
» In patients with an identifiable reversible cause
of VT (e.g., ischemia, myocardial infarction,
toxicity, drug overdose) management will also
involve treatment of the reversible cause.[1]
adjunct antiarrhythmic medication
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» amiodarone: 300 mg intravenous push
Secondary options
» lidocaine: 1 to 1.5 mg/kg intravenously as a
single dose
» Medical therapy provides an important
adjunctive therapy to emergency cardiovascular
care, based on the advanced cardiac life support
protocol. Amiodarone and/or lidocaine are
considered useful antiarrhythmic drugs in these
circumstances.[34]
torsades de pointes
1st intravenous magnesium sulfate +
withdraw offending drugs + correct
electrolyte abnormalities
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
Initial
Primary options
» magnesium sulfate: 1-2 g intravenously as
a single dose
» Torsades de pointes, a specific type of
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT)
characterized by a twisting appearance around
the baseline, occurs in the setting of QT
prolongation due to either the congenital or
acquired forms of the long QT syndrome.
Torsades de pointes should be treated as any
other form of VT according to the advanced
cardiac life support protocol, with special
recognition of the fact that hypokalemia and
hypomagnesemia frequently are associated
with torsades. Electrolyte deficiencies should
be replenished aggressively. Offending drugs
should be withdrawn. An up-to-date list of
drugs is available through research centers. 
[CredibleMeds: Arizona Center for Education
and Research on Therapeutics] (https://
www.crediblemeds.org)  Intravenous magnesium
sulfate should be administered. Additionally,
overdrive pacing and isoproterenol infusion may
be useful in this arrhythmia as they reduce the
QT interval.[34]
adjunct isoproterenol infusion
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» isoproterenol: 2 micrograms/minute
intravenous infusion initially, dose titrated
according to response, maximum 10
micrograms/minute
» Indicated in patients who present with
recurrent torsades de pointes after initial acute
therapy.
» It may be useful in this arrhythmia as it reduces
the QT interval.[56]
» It is important to be certain that the
patient does not have acute ischemia before
administering isoproterenol.
adjunct temporary or permanent pacing
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Indicated in recurrent torsades de pointes after
acute therapy.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
Initial
catecholaminergic polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia
1st beta-blockers
Primary options
» nadolol: consult specialist for guidance on
dose
» Medical therapy for catecholaminergic
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia includes the
use of beta-blockers for both acute and chronic
treatment.[27] [35]
» High dose of beta-blockers is usually required.
» Other treatment strategies have been
proposed, including a stepwise addition of
alternate treatment options, such as calcium-
channel blockers and flecainide, to beta-blockers
in patients who do not respond sufficiently or
who cannot tolerate beta-blockers. Left cardiac
sympathetic denervation appears to be effective,
but has only been tested on small cohorts, and is
not universally available.[27]
adjunct implantable cardioverter defibrillator
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)
insertion is needed in patients with recurrent
syncope despite beta-blockers, or those who
are survivors of cardiac arrest, especially in the
setting of coronary artery disease. ICDs should
not be implanted without concomitant beta-
blocker therapy, as ICD shocks will increase
catecholamine surge, potentially leading to a
vicious cycle of ventricular arrhythmias and ICD
shocks.
» ICD therapy provides a continuous monitor
for the cardiac rhythm and the capability of
terminating ventricular tachycardia by overdrive
pacing and/or cardioversion defibrillation.
» ICD implant requires surgery and is associated
with a small risk of procedural mortality. The
long-term risks of ICD therapy include device
malfunction, infection, and/or inappropriate
shocks. Risk factors for infection include
comorbid conditions such as diabetes and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, as
well as oral anticoagulation therapy and
corticosteroid use. Measures such as antibiotic
prophylaxis and good patient education on
wound care can help reduce risk.[49] ICD
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
Initial
shocks can be painful and if frequent may impair
the patient's quality of life.[43] [44] [45] [50]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
hemodynamically stable
nonidiopathic sustained ventricular
tachycardia
1st antiarrhythmic medications + treatment of
reversible cause (if present)
Primary options
» adenosine: 6 mg intravenously initially,
followed by 12 mg every 1-2 minutes for up to
2 doses according to response
OR
» procainamide: 10-17 mg/kg (20-30 mg/
minute) intravenous infusion initially (or 100
mg intravenously every 5 minutes), followed
by 1-4 mg/minute infusion, adjust dose
according to response, maximum 9 g/day
(maintenance)
Secondary options
» amiodarone: 150 mg intravenous infusion
given over 10 minutes initially, followed by 1
mg/minute for 6 hours, followed by 0.5 mg/
minute for 18 hours
» The group of patients discussed here as
nonidiopathic include those with identifiable
reversible causes for ventricular tachycardia
(VT) as well as those in whom there are no
identifiable causes. Idiopathic VT (although
defined as occurring in the absence of structural
heart disease, known genetic disorder, drug
toxicity, or electrolyte imbalance) is identifiable
by electrophysiologic testing and response to
certain medications. Therefore, in the case of
VTs, idiopathic VT refers to a specific subtype of
tachycardias that are defined and identifiable.
» Antiarrhythmic medications are useful in
the acute management of hemodynamically
stable VT. Before initiating antiarrhythmic drug
therapy for a wide complex tachycardia, it is
important to be confident in the diagnosis and
to make sure that the patient is not experiencing
supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) with aberrant
conduction. Conversely, the diagnosis of
SVT with aberrancy should also be made
carefully, as certain medications (e.g., verapamil,
diltiazem) can exacerbate the clinical situation by
worsening the patient’s hemodynamic status if
the actual arrhythmia is VT.
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
Acute
» According to the American Heart Association
(AHA), intravenous adenosine can be
considered to aid in treatment and diagnosis
when the cause of the regular, monomorphic
rhythm cannot be determined.[34] Other
antiarrhythmic drugs may also be considered
in the acute management of stable VT. The
AHA recommends intravenous procainamide
or intravenous amiodarone.[34] Intravenous
procainamide has been shown to be more
efficacious than intravenous amiodarone
in terminating wide complex tachycardia
(67% vs. 38%, respectively; P = 0.026),
and was associated with fewer adverse
events.[39] However, procainamide may be more
proarrhythmic and should be used with caution
in the setting of baseline QT prolongation.[34]
» In patients with an identifiable reversible cause
of VT (e.g., ischemia, myocardial infarction,
toxicity, drug overdose) management will also
involve treatment of the reversible cause.[1]
2nd synchronized cardioversion ±
antiarrhythmic medications
Primary options
» amiodarone: 150 mg intravenous infusion
given over 10 minutes initially, followed by 1
mg/minute for 6 hours, followed by 0.5 mg/
minute for 18 hours
Secondary options
» lidocaine: 1 to 1.5 mg/kg intravenously
initially, followed by 1-4 mg/minute infusion
» In patients who do not respond to the initial
acute treatment with antiarrhythmic therapy,
synchronized electrical cardioversion is an
important treatment for hemodynamically
tolerated sustained (monomorphic) ventricular
tachycardia (VT). Among patients who fail an
initial attempt at synchronized cardioversion,
antiarrhythmic medications such as amiodarone
or lidocaine may be administered prior to
additional attempts at cardioversion.
» Synchronized cardioversion should be
considered before attempting antiarrhythmic
drug therapy in patients who are highly
symptomatic (particularly those with symptoms
of diminished cerebral perfusion), even if they
have apparently stable hemodynamics.
» Advanced cardiac life support guidelines
recommend giving amiodarone or lidocaine, then
synchronized cardioversion.[34]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
» In patients with an identifiable reversible cause
of VT (e.g., ischemia, myocardial infarction,
toxicity, drug overdose) management will also
involve ongoing treatment of the reversible
cause.[1]
hemodynamically stable idiopathic
sustained ventricular tachycardia
1st intravenous antiarrhythmic medications
Primary options
Outflow tract VT
» adenosine: 6 mg intravenously initially,
followed by 12 mg every 1-2 minutes for up to
2 doses according to response
OR
Fascicular VT
» verapamil: 5-10 mg intravenously initially,
followed by 10 mg after 30 minutes if no
adequate response seen, maximum 20 mg
total dose
OR
Outflow tract VT
» metoprolol tartrate: 5 mg intravenously
initially, repeat every 2 minutes according to
response, maximum 15 mg total dose
Secondary options
» amiodarone: 150 mg intravenous infusion
given over 10 minutes, followed by 1 mg/
minute for 6 hours, followed by 0.5 mg/minute
for 18 hours
OR
» lidocaine: 1 to 1.5 mg/kg intravenously as a
single dose
» Idiopathic ventricular tachycardias (VTs)
are several distinct entities of VT that occur
in the absence of structural heart disease,
known genetic disorder, drug toxicity, or
electrolyte imbalance, but are identifiable by
electrophysiologic testing and response to
certain medications. Therefore, in the case of
VTs, idiopathic VT refers to a specific subtype
of tachycardias that are defined and identifiable.
These conditions require specific treatment, and
seeking specialist help is recommended.
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
Acute
» Specific types of idiopathic VT
characteristically respond to specific
medications, a feature that is useful for
diagnostic as well as therapeutic purposes in the
acute setting. Idiopathic outflow tract VT can be
terminated with a bolus of adenosine. Outflow
tract tachycardias may also respond to beta-
blockade or to vagal maneuvers.
» Fascicular VT characteristically responds to
verapamil, but the drug should be used with
extreme caution due to the risk of hypotension
and hemodynamic collapse if given to other
forms of VT.
» In cases refractory to adenosine or verapamil,
idiopathic VT can be treated with antiarrhythmic
medications (lidocaine, amiodarone); if
necessary, synchronized electrical cardioversion
may be performed.[34]
» If the patient is not already being managed
by a specialist, following successful termination
of the tachycardia and stabilization, he
or she should be referred to a specialist
(electrophysiologist) for further management.
2nd synchronized cardioversion
» In patients with idiopathic ventricular
tachycardia who have failed to respond to
antiarrhythmic drug therapy, synchronized
electrical cardioversion should be considered.
Earlier use of cardioversion may be warranted in
patients who are highly symptomatic (particularly
with symptoms of diminished cerebral perfusion)
despite apparently stable hemodynamics.
» If the patient is not already being managed
by a specialist, following successful termination
of the tachycardia and stabilization, he
or she should be referred to a specialist
(electrophysiologist) for further management.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
nonidiopathic: at high risk for
ventricular tachycardia or history of
sustained ventricular tachycardia/
cardiac arrest without identifiable
reversible cause
1st implantable cardioverter defibrillator
» The group of patients discussed here as
nonidiopathic include those with identifiable
reversible causes for ventricular tachycardia
(VT) as well as those in whom there are no
identifiable causes. Idiopathic VT (although
defined as occurring in the absence of structural
heart disease, known genetic disorder, drug
toxicity, or electrolyte imbalance) is identifiable
by electrophysiologic (EP) testing and response
to certain medications. Therefore, in the case of
VTs, idiopathic VT refers to a specific subtype
of tachycardias that are defined and identifiable.
This is different from tachycardias with no
identifiable cause, in which the patient would
have no signs of a definitive cause for the VT or
signs of an idiopathic VT.
» Patients at high risk for VT for which
implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD)
implantation is the recommended initial
treatment/preventive measure include those
with: ischemic cardiomyopathy (left ventricular
ejection fraction [LVEF] ≤35%, or ≤40% with
nonsustained VT and inducible VT during EP);
nonischemic cardiomyopathy (LVEF ≤35%
and New York Heart Association class II or
III symptoms); hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(HCM) with one or more of the following high-risk
features: 1) family history of sudden death from
HCM; 2) massive left ventricular hypertrophy
(wall thickness ≥30 mm); 3) unexplained
syncope; 4) left ventricular systolic dysfunction;
5) left ventricular apical aneurysm; 6) extensive
late gadolinium enhancement on cardiovascular
magnetic resonance imaging; 7) frequent,
longer, and faster runs of nonsustained VT; or
congenital arrhythmia syndromes, including long
QT syndrome and Brugada syndrome with high-
risk features.[8][9]
» ICD therapy provides a continuous monitor
for the cardiac rhythm and the capability of
terminating VT by overdrive pacing and/or
cardioversion defibrillation.
» ICD therapy has become the most important
treatment to reduce mortality among high-
risk patients, with a 30% to 40% relative risk
reduction in cardiac death with ICD therapy.
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
Ongoing
Medications have been shown to be less
efficacious than ICDs in reducing the burden of
malignant ventricular arrhythmias in high-risk
patients and are considered adjunctive therapy
for managing these conditions.
» ICDs have been shown to be more effective
than antiarrhythmic medications in reducing
overall mortality in cardiac arrest survivors
who did not have reversible causes of cardiac
arrest, including toxic/metabolic abnormalities,
trauma, and acute ischemia. ICD implantation is
contraindicated in such cases when correction of
the disorder is considered feasible and likely to
substantially reduce the risk of recurrence.
» ICD implant requires surgery and is associated
with a small risk of procedural mortality. The
long-term risks of ICD therapy include device
malfunction, infection, and/or inappropriate
shocks. Risk factors for infection include
comorbid conditions such as diabetes and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, as
well as oral anticoagulation therapy and
corticosteroid use. Measures such as antibiotic
prophylaxis and good patient education on
wound care can help reduce risk.[49] ICD
shocks can be painful and if frequent may impair
the patient's quality of life.[43] [44] [45] [50]
adjunct antiarrhythmic medication
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» mexiletine: 200 mg orally every 8 hours
OR
» flecainide: 100-150 mg orally twice daily
OR
» propafenone: 150-300 mg orally
(immediate-release) every 8 hours; or
225-425 mg orally (extended-release) every
12 hours
OR
» sotalol: 80-160 mg orally twice daily
OR
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
» amiodarone: 800-1600 mg/day orally given
in single or divided doses for 1-3 weeks,
followed by 600-800 mg/day given in single
or divided doses for 4 weeks, followed by
200-400 mg/day given in single or divided
doses
» Antiarrhythmic drugs may be useful as
adjunctive therapies for high-risk patients already
implanted with an implantable cardioverter
defibrillator (ICD) or for whom ICD therapy is not
an option.[7] However, randomized trials have
shown that currently available oral antiarrhythmic
drugs, other than beta-blockers, do not prolong
life when used chronically in the treatment
of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias
and sudden death.[7] Some antiarrhythmic
medications may be inappropriate for patients
with structural heart disease because of their
negative inotropic properties and increased risk
of causing ventricular tachycardia. Amiodarone
can increase defibrillation thresholds and,
therefore, potentially impair ICD function.[53]
2nd antiarrhythmic monotherapy
Primary options
» mexiletine: 200 mg orally every 8 hours
OR
» flecainide: 100-150 mg orally twice daily
OR
» propafenone: 150-300 mg orally
(immediate-release) every 8 hours
OR
» sotalol: 80-160 mg orally twice daily
OR
» amiodarone: 800-1600 mg/day orally given
in single or divided doses for 1-3 weeks,
followed by 600-800 mg/day given in single
or divided doses for 4 weeks, followed by
200-400 mg/day given in single or divided
doses
» Antiarrhythmic drugs may be useful as
adjunctive therapies for high-risk patients already
implanted with an implantable cardioverter
defibrillator (ICD) or for whom ICD therapy
is not an option.[7] However, randomized
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
Ongoing
trials have shown that currently available oral
antiarrhythmic drugs, other than beta-blockers,
do not prolong life when used chronically in
the treatment of life-threatening ventricular
arrhythmias and sudden death.[7] Antiarrhythmic
medications may be inappropriate for patients
with structural heart disease because of their
negative inotropic properties and increased risk
of causing ventricular tachycardia. Amiodarone
can increase defibrillator thresholds and,
therefore, potentially impair ICD function.[53]
structural heart disease
with recurrent episodes of
ventricular tachycardia
plus catheter ablation
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Catheter ablation may also be used as a
palliative measure in patients with structural
heart disease experiencing recurrent episodes of
ventricular tachycardia.[40] [54]
idiopathic ventricular tachycardia
idiopathic ventricular
tachycardia
1st specialist referral for ongoing
antiarrhythmic treatment
» Idiopathic ventricular tachycardias (VTs)
are several distinct entities of VT that occur
in the absence of structural heart disease,
known genetic disorder, drug toxicity, or
electrolyte imbalance, but are identifiable by
electrophysiologic testing and response to
certain medications. Therefore, in the case of
VTs, idiopathic VT refers to a specific subtype
of tachycardias that are defined and identifiable.
These conditions require specific treatment, and
seeking specialist help is recommended.
mild-to-moderate
symptoms (rare
palpitations that do
not interfere with daily
activities)
plus beta-blockers or calcium-channel blockers
or catheter ablation
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» metoprolol tartrate: 50-200 mg/day orally
(immediate-release) given in 2 divided doses
OR
» atenolol: 25 to 100 mg orally once daily
OR
» verapamil: 180-240 mg/day orally
(immediate-release) given in 3-4 divided
doses; 180-240 mg orally (extended-release)
once daily
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
OR
» diltiazem: 90-360 mg/day orally (immediate-
release) given in 3-4 divided doses; 90-360
mg orally (extended-release) once daily
» In ongoing therapy for patients with idiopathic
ventricular tachycardia and mild-to-moderate
symptoms, beta-blockers or calcium-channel
blockers usually provide sufficient treatment.
» In terms of the choice of calcium-channel
blockers, verapamil is usually used, with
diltiazem as another option.
» It is a matter of physician and patient
preference in deciding between medications and
ablation in this setting.[40]
moderate-to-severe
symptoms (syncope,
presyncope, or frequent,
disabling palpitations)
or associated
cardiomyopathy
plus catheter ablation
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» In ongoing therapy for patients with moderate-
to-severe symptoms or with associated
cardiomyopathy, catheter ablation of ventricular
tachycardia should be considered as first line.
Catheter ablation is also indicated in patients
in whom beta-blockers and/or calcium-channel
blockers are ineffective or poorly tolerated.[40]
» It is also reasonable as first-line therapy in
patients with mild-to-moderate symptoms who
prefer not to take medications.
failure of beta-
blockers, calcium-
channel blockers, or
catheter ablation, or
noncandidates for
catheter ablation
plus class I or class III antiarrhythmic
medications
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» mexiletine: 200 mg orally every 8 hours
OR
» flecainide: 100-200 mg orally twice daily
OR
» propafenone: 150 to 350 mg orally
(immediate-release) every 8 hours
OR
» sotalol: 80-160 mg orally twice daily
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
Ongoing
Secondary options
» amiodarone: 200 mg/day orally given in
single or divided doses
» In ongoing therapy, antiarrhythmic agents,
including class I drugs (mexiletine, flecainide,
and propafenone) and class III agents
(amiodarone and sotalol), may be used in
patients who fail therapy with beta-blockers
and/or calcium-channel blockers and who are
not candidates for catheter ablation or in whom
catheter ablation is ineffective.[40] [41]
» Medication choice is usually based on
individual patient/physician preference.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
MANAGEMENT
Emerging
Remote magnetic navigation
Remote magnetic navigation (RMN) is a robotic navigation technique used in the mapping and ablation of
arrhythmias. It is associated with better catheter precision and stability than with a manual technique. One
systematic review found RMN to be an effective and safe method for the ablation of ventricular tachycardia
with low recurrence and complication rates; however, the quality of the reviewed evidence was poor.[57] One
small retrospective study in children found that RMN-guided ablation was associated with lower ventricular
arrhythmia recurrence rates and allowed for lower fluoroscopy doses than with manual-guided ablation.[58]
However, one longer-term study in adults found that ventricular arrhythmia recurred within 5.5 years in
39% of 176 individuals who underwent RMN-guided ablation.[59] Risk of recurrence was greatest in those
with left ventricular ejection fraction <40%, dilated cardiomyopathy, and those receiving antiarrhythmic
pharmacotherapy.[59] Clinical studies of RMN in ventricular arrhythmia and atrial fibrillation are ongoing.
Stereotactic radioablation
Stereotactic body radiation therapy, or stereotactic radioablation, is an emerging modality for the treatment
of ventricular arrhythmias that are refractory to antiarrhythmic therapy and catheter ablation. It involves the
precise delivery of a very high radiation dose to the targeted area, while minimizing collateral damage to the
surrounding myocardium and other structures. The ENCORE-VT trial was a prospective phase 1/2 trial on
noninvasive cardiac radioablation in treatment-refractory VT. Nineteen patients were included in the study,
and stereotactic radioablation was associated with reduced ventricular arrhythmia burden with modest short-
term risks, reduction in antiarrhythmic therapy, and improvement in quality of life.[60]
Primary prevention
Primary prevention of ventricular arrhythmia is best accomplished by treating risk factors for coronary
artery disease and left ventricular systolic dysfunction, including smoking cessation and management of
hypertension and hyperlipidemia. Additional preventive measures include optimization of medical treatment
of systolic dysfunction with medications such as ACE inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers, beta-blockers,
and aldosterone antagonists. In patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy, and the long QT syndrome, strenuous physical exertion should be avoided as exercise can
provoke arrhythmias in these populations.
In addition, owing to the unpredictable and life-threatening nature of sustained ventricular tachycardias
(VTs), primary prevention is critical in high-risk patients and can be accomplished through implantation of
a prophylactic implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD). Traditionally, ICDs have been implanted with a
transvenous lead. However, a subcutaneous ICD, where the ICD lead remains extravascular, is also an
option. An approved version involves an ICD lead tunneled subcutaneously near the inferior border of the left
rib cage and then up along the sternum, with the ICD generator located in the left axillary region.[19] Another
extravascular ICD, involving a lead placed under the sternum, is being investigated.[20]
Patients at high risk include those with:
• Ischemic or nonischemic cardiomyopathy (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] ≤35%) and mild-to-
moderate congestive heart failure symptoms (New York Heart Association class II or III symptoms).
Those with severe heart failure (class IV) are at high risk as well, but have progressive heart failure
as a competing mode of death, and thus should be considered for ICD only if they are candidates for
cardiac resynchronization therapy
• Ischemic cardiomyopathy (LVEF ≤40%) with nonsustained VT and inducible sustained VT during
electrophysiologic testing
• Ischemic cardiomyopathy (LVEF ≤30% and New York Heart Association class I symptoms)
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Management
• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) with high-risk features such as family history of sudden death
from HCM; massive left ventricular hypertrophy (wall thickness ≥30 mm); unexplained syncope;
left ventricular systolic dysfunction; left ventricular apical aneurysm; extensive late gadolinium
enhancement on cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging; or frequent, longer, and faster runs of
nonsustained VT.[8][9] Other clinical features that are utilized in calculating sudden cardiac death risk
in HCM include age, left atrial diameter, left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, and exercise blood
pressure response
• Congenital arrhythmia syndromes, including symptomatic patients with long QT syndrome, Brugada
syndrome, and catecholaminergic polymorphic VT with high-risk features.
One large cohort study found that the risk of first and recurrent life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias
following ICD placement was significantly lower in women than in men. This suggests that a sex-specific
risk assessment for prophylactic ICD placement may be beneficial. However, further research to better
understand the sex differences driving these findings is warranted.[21]
Secondary prevention
In general, compliance with prescribed antiarrhythmic medications should help lessen the burden of
ventricular arrhythmias. Patients with ischemic ventricular tachycardia should explore the feasibility of
revascularization therapy.
Patient discussions
Patients should report episodes of syncope, presyncope, chest pain, or palpitations to their physicians,
as these symptoms may indicate recurrent ventricular tachycardia. Patients on long-term antiarrhythmic
medications may require specific follow-up to monitor for efficacy and/or toxicity. Patients should
be educated about specific adverse effects associated with their antiarrhythmic medications, such
as symptoms of thyroid dysfunction among patients taking amiodarone. Patients implanted with an
implantable cardioverter defibrillator should report to their physician any shocks from the device or
evidence of device infection (erythema, tenderness, or pus). Good patient education on wound care can
help reduce the risk of device infection.[49]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Monitoring
Monitoring
Patients with ventricular tachycardia should be evaluated by an electrophysiologist. An assessment of
their underlying cardiac status should be undertaken and medical therapy and/or implantable cardioverter
defibrillator (ICD) therapy should be initiated as clinically indicated.
Patients implanted with an ICD require routine device checks, and need to be reevaluated promptly if
symptoms of the tachycardia recur, or if the device delivers a shock. Many routine device checks can
be performed via remote monitoring. Monitoring is daily and “virtual” (remote) device reports are usually
created every 3 months.
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Follow up
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
implantable cardioverter defibrillator system
malfunction (device or leads)
long term low
May require urgent device replacement or modification of one or more components of the implantable
cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) system. However, if the failure rate is sufficiently low and is less than the
risk of ICD replacement, optimal management of devices that are prone to failure may consist of close
observation of the patient rather than prophylactic device replacement.
ventricular fibrillation variable high
Patients who develop sustained ventricular tachycardia in the context of left ventricular systolic dysfunction
often have reentrant rhythms around myocardial scars. Such reentrant circuits can degenerate to
ventricular fibrillation and are associated with a high mortality rate.
sudden cardiac death variable high
Ventricular tachycardia is a common cause of sudden cardiac death.
implantable cardioverter defibrillator-related infection variable low
Often results from bacteremia. Infection may occur along the intravascular portion of the leads or in the
generator pocket. Risk factors for infection include comorbid conditions such as diabetes and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, as well as oral anticoagulation therapy and corticosteroid use. Measures
such as antibiotic prophylaxis and good patient education on wound care can help reduce risk.[49]
Treatment usually requires complete removal of the implantable cardioverter defibrillator system and a
prolonged course of antibiotics.
cardiomyopathy variable low
Frequent or incessant idiopathic ventricular premature complexes or nonsustained ventricular tachycardia
have been associated with a reversible, tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy that regresses following
therapy with medications or catheter ablation.[63]
amiodarone-induced thyroid dysfunction variable low
Amiodarone can cause adverse effects, including thyroid dysfunction (both hypo- and hyperthyroidism).
Prognosis
Idiopathic ventricular tachycardia
Idiopathic ventricular tachycardia (VT) generally carries a favorable prognosis. In most patients, idiopathic VT
is not a progressive condition. The most common symptoms associated with idiopathic VT are palpitations
and presyncope; true syncope is uncommon (10% to 20%). Patients presenting with apparent idiopathic VT
arising from the right ventricle should undergo a careful evaluation for occult arrhythmogenic right ventricular
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Follow up
FOLLOW UP
cardiomyopathy, as ventricular premature complexes (VPC) and VT are frequent early manifestations of
this disorder. Frequent or incessant idiopathic VPCs or nonsustained VT have been associated with a
reversible, tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy that regresses following therapy with medications or catheter
ablation.[63]
Nonidiopathic VT
In contrast to idiopathic VT, patients who develop sustained VT in the context of left ventricular systolic
dysfunction often have reentrant rhythms around myocardial scars. Such reentrant circuits can degenerate
to ventricular fibrillation and are associated with a high mortality rate. Implantable cardioverter defibrillator
(ICD) implantation provides continuous monitoring of their cardiac rhythm and the capability to terminate
VT through overdrive pacing and/or defibrillation. Owing to the unpredictable and rapid onset of sustained
VT, and its serious consequence if left untreated, prophylactic ICD therapy has become the most important
treatment to reduce mortality among high-risk patients.[7]
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Guidelines
Diagnostic guidelines
International
2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/SCMR guideline for the management of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (https://www.acc.org/Guidelines)   [9]
Published by: American Heart Association; American College of
Cardiology
Last published: 2024
2020 Canadian Cardiovascular Society/Canadian Heart Rhythm Society
position statement on the management of ventricular tachycardia and
fibrillation in patients with structural heart disease (https://ccs.ca/guidelines-
and-position-statement-library)   [29]
Published by: Canadian Cardiovascular Society; Canadian Heart
Rhythm Society
Last published: 2020
2017 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for management of patients with ventricular
arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death (https://www.acc.org/
guidelines)   [7]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; Heart Rhythm Society
Last published: 2017
2014 EHRA/HRS/APHRS expert consensus on ventricular arrhythmias (https://
www.hrsonline.org/guidance/clinical-resources)   [30]
Published by: European Heart Rhythm Association; Heart Rhythm
Society; Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society
Last published: 2014
HRS/EHRA/APHRS expert consensus statement on the diagnosis and
management of patients with inherited primary arrhythmia syndromes
(https://www.hrsonline.org/guidance/clinical-resources)   [31]
Published by: Heart Rhythm Society; European Heart Rhythm
Association; Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society
Last published: 2013
2023 ESC guidelines for the management of cardiomyopathies (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [8]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2023
2022 ESC guidelines for the management of patients with ventricular
arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [1]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2022
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Guidelines
GUIDELINES
Treatment guidelines
International
2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/SCMR guideline for the management of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (https://www.acc.org/guidelines)   [9]
Published by: American Heart Association; American College of
Cardiology
Last published: 2024
2020 Canadian Cardiovascular Society/Canadian Heart Rhythm Society
position statement on the management of ventricular tachycardia and
fibrillation in patients with structural heart disease (https://ccs.ca/guidelines-
and-position-statement-library)   [29]
Published by: Canadian Cardiovascular Society; Canadian Heart
Rhythm Society
Last published: 2020
2020 AHA guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency
cardiovascular care. Part 3: adult basic and advanced life support (https://
eccguidelines.heart.org/circulation/cpr-ecc-guidelines)   [34]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2020
2017 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for management of patients with ventricular
arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death (https://www.acc.org/
guidelines)   [7]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; Heart Rhythm Society
Last published: 2017
2015 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the management of adult patients with
supraventricular tachycardia (https://www.acc.org/guidelines)   [61]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines; Heart Rhythm
Society
Last published: 2015
2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS focused update of the 2008 guidelines for device-based
therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities (https://professional.heart.org/en/
guidelines-and-statements)   [52]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association; Heart Rhythm Society
Last published: 2012
HRS/EHRA/APHRS/LAHRS expert consensus statement on catheter ablation
of ventricular arrhythmias (https://www.hrsonline.org/guidance/clinical-
resources)   [40]
Published by: Heart Rhythm Society; European Heart Rhythm
Association; Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society; Latin American Heart
Rhythm Society
Last published: 2019
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Guidelines
International
HRS/EHRA/APHRS expert consensus statement on the diagnosis and
management of patients with inherited primary arrhythmia syndromes
(https://www.hrsonline.org/guidance/clinical-resources)   [31]
Published by: Heart Rhythm Society; European Heart Rhythm
Association; Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society
Last published: 2013
2023 ESC guidelines for the management of cardiomyopathies (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [8]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2023
2022 ESC guidelines for the management of patients with ventricular
arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death (https://
www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [1]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2022
2019 ESC guidelines for the management of patients with supraventricular
tachycardia (https://www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-
Guidelines)   [62]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2019
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
53
=== Page 54 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Online resources
ONLINE RESOURCES
Online resources
1. CredibleMeds: Arizona Center for Education and Research on Therapeutics (https://
www.crediblemeds.org)  (external link)
2. American Heart Association: guidelines for CPR and emergency cardiovascular care (https://
eccguidelines.heart.org/index.php/circulation/cpr-ecc-guidelines-2)  (external link)
54 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 55 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias References
Key articles
• Zeppenfeld K, Tfelt-Hansen J, de Riva M, et al. 2022 ESC guidelines for the management of patients
with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death. Eur Heart J. 2022 Oct
21;43(40):3997-4126.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/40/3997/6675633?
login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36017572?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al. 2017 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for management
of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death: a report of
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Oct 2;72(14):e91-220. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29097296?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Pedersen CT, Kay GN, Kalman J, et al. EHRA/HRS/APHRS expert consensus on ventricular
arrhythmias. Heart Rhythm. 2014 Oct;11(10):e166-96.  Full text (https://www.hrsonline.org/guidance/
clinical-resources/2014-ehrahrsaphrs-expert-consensus-ventricular-arrhythmias)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25179489?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Panchal AR, Bartos JA, Cabañas JG, et al; Adult Basic and Advanced Life Support Writing
Group. Part 3: adult basic and advanced life support: 2020 American Heart Association
guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation.
2020 Oct 20;142(16_suppl_2):S366-468.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000916)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33081529?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Cronin EM, Bogun FM, Maury P, et al. 2019 HRS/EHRA/APHRS/LAHRS expert consensus statement
on catheter ablation of ventricular arrhythmias. J Arrhythm. 2019 May 10;35(3):323-484.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6595359)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31293696?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. Zeppenfeld K, Tfelt-Hansen J, de Riva M, et al. 2022 ESC guidelines for the management of patients
with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death. Eur Heart J. 2022 Oct
21;43(40):3997-4126.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/40/3997/6675633?
login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36017572?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Stecker E, Vickers C, Waltz J, et al. Population-based analysis of sudden cardiac death with and
without left ventricular systolic dysfunction: two-year findings from the Oregon Sudden Unexpected
Death Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006 Mar 21;47(6):1161-6.  Full text (http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0735109705031074)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16545646?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
55
=== Page 56 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias References
REFERENCES
3. Cubillos-Garzon LA, Casas JP, Morillo CA, et al. Congestive heart failure in Latin America:
the next epidemic. Am Heart J. 2004 Mar;147(3):412-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/14999188?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Kies P, Bootsma M, Bax J, et al. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy:
Screening, diagnosis, and treatment. Heart Rhythm. 2006 Feb;3(2):225-34. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16443541?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Chugh SS, Reinier K, Teodorescu C, et al. Epidemiology of sudden cardiac death: clinical and
research implications. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2008 Nov-Dec;51(3):213-28.  Full text (https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2621010)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19026856?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. Kim RJ, Iwai S, Markowitz SM, et al. Clinical and electrophysiological spectrum of idiopathic
ventricular outflow tract arrhythmias. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007 May 22;49(20):2035-43. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17512360?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al. 2017 AHA/ACC/HRS Guideline for management
of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death: a report of
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018 Oct 2;72(14):e91-220. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29097296?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Arbelo E, Protonotarios A, Gimeno JR, et al. 2023 ESC guidelines for the management of
cardiomyopathies. Eur Heart J. 2023 Oct 1;44(37):3503-626.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/44/37/3503/7246608)
9. Ommen SR, Ho CY, Asif IM, et al. 2024 AHA/ACC/AMSSM/HRS/PACES/SCMR guideline for
the management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of the American Heart Association/
American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2024 Jun
4;149(23):e1239-311.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001250) 
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38718139?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Schwartz PJ, Priori SG, Spazzolini C, et al. Genotype-phenotype correlation in the long-QT syndrome:
gene-specific triggers for life-threatening arrhythmias. Circulation. 2001 Jan 2;103(1):89-95. 
Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/103/1/89.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11136691?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Shimizu W. The long QT syndrome: therapeutic implications of a genetic diagnosis. Cardiovasc Res.
2005 Aug 15;67(3):347-56.  Full text (http://cardiovascres.oxfordjournals.org/content/67/3/347.full)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15979599?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Hu D, Barajas-Martinez H, Pfeiffer R, et al. Mutations in SCN10A are responsible for a large
fraction of cases of Brugada syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Jul 8;64(1):66-79. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24998131?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Priori SG, Gasparini M, Napolitano C, et al. Risk stratification in Brugada syndrome: results of the
PRELUDE (PRogrammed ELectrical stimUlation preDictive valuE) registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012
56 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 57 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias References
Jan 3;59(1):37-45.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S073510971104530X?
via%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22192666?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Antzelevitch C, Brugada P, Borggrefe M, et al. Brugada syndrome: report of the second consensus
conference. Heart Rhythm. 2005 Apr;2(4):429-40. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15898165?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Mehra R, Chung MK, Olshansky B, et al. Sleep-disordered breathing and cardiac arrhythmias
in adults: mechanistic insights and clinical implications: a scientific statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation. 2022 Aug 30;146(9):e119-36.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001082?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub
%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35912643?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Wilde AAM, Semsarian C, Márquez MF, et al. European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA)/
Heart Rhythm Society (HRS)/Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS)/Latin American Heart
Rhythm Society (LAHRS) expert consensus statement on the state of genetic testing for cardiac
diseases. Europace. 2022 Sep 1;24(8):1307-67.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/europace/
article/24/8/1307/6562982?login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35373836?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Musunuru K, Hershberger RE, Day SM, et al. Genetic testing for inherited cardiovascular diseases:
a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Genom Precis Med. 2020
Aug;13(4):e000067.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/HCG.0000000000000067)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32698598?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. McKenna WJ, Thiene G, Nava A, et al. Diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/
cardiomyopathy. Br Heart J. 1994 Mar;71(3):215-8.  Full text (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC483655/pdf/brheartj00172-0007.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8142187?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Friedman DJ, Tully AS, Zeitler EP. Subcutaneous and transvenous ICDs: an update on contemporary
questions and controversies. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2022 Aug;24(8):947-58. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35639275?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Friedman P, Murgatroyd F, Boersma LVA, et al. Efficacy and safety of an extravascular
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator. N Engl J Med. 2022 Oct 6;387(14):1292-302. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36036522?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Saxena S, Goldenberg I, McNitt S, et al. Sex differences in the risk of first and recurrent ventricular
tachyarrhythmias among patients receiving an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for primary
prevention. JAMA Netw Open. 2022 Jun 1;5(6):e2217153.  Full text (https://jamanetwork.com/journals/
jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2793349)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35699956?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Wellens HJ, Brugada P. Diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia from the 12-lead electrocardiogram.
Cardiol Clin. 1987 Sep;5(3):511-25. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3690604?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
57
=== Page 58 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias References
REFERENCES
23. Brugada P, Brugada J, Mont L, et al. A new approach to the differential diagnosis of a regular
tachycardia with a wide QRS complex. Circulation. 1991 May;83(5):1649-59. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2022022?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Vereckei A, Duray G, Szénási G, et al. New algorithm using only lead aVR for differential
diagnosis of wide QRS complex tachycardia. Heart Rhythm. 2008 Jan;5(1):89-98. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18180024?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Vereckei A. Current algorithms for the diagnosis of wide QRS complex tachycardias. Curr Cardiol Rev.
2014 Aug;10(3):262-76.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4040878)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24827795?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Moccetti F, Yadava M, Latifi Y, et al. Simplified integrated clinical and electrocardiographic algorithm for
differentiation of wide QRS complex tachycardia: the Basel algorithm. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2022
Jul;8(7):831-9.  Full text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405500X22003139?via
%3Dihub)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35863808?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. van der Werf C, Zwinderman AH, Wilde AA. Therapeutic approach for patients with catecholaminergic
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia: state of the art and future developments. Europace.
2012 Feb;14(2):175-83. [Erratum in: Europace. 2012 Dec;14(12):1810.]  Full text (http://
europace.oxfordjournals.org/content/14/2/175.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21893508?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Nielsen JC, Lin YJ, de Oliveira Figueiredo MJ, et al. European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA)/
Heart Rhythm Society (HRS)/Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society (APHRS)/Latin American Heart
Rhythm Society (LAHRS) expert consensus on risk assessment in cardiac arrhythmias: use the right
tool for the right outcome, in the right population. Heart Rhythm. 2020 Sep;17(9):e269-316.  Full
text (https://www.heartrhythmjournal.com/article/S1547-5271(20)30425-2/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32553607?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Deyell MW, AbdelWahab A, Angaran P, et al. 2020 Canadian Cardiovascular Society/Canadian Heart
Rhythm Society position statement on the management of ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation
in patients with structural heart disease. Can J Cardiol. 2020 Jun;36(6):822-36.  Full text (https://
www.onlinecjc.ca/article/S0828-282X(20)30326-3/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/32536373?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Pedersen CT, Kay GN, Kalman J, et al. EHRA/HRS/APHRS expert consensus on ventricular
arrhythmias. Heart Rhythm. 2014 Oct;11(10):e166-96.  Full text (https://www.hrsonline.org/guidance/
clinical-resources/2014-ehrahrsaphrs-expert-consensus-ventricular-arrhythmias)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25179489?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Priori SG, Wilde AA, Horie M, et al. HRS/EHRA/APHRS expert consensus statement on the diagnosis
and management of patients with inherited primary arrhythmia syndromes: document endorsed
by HRS, EHRA, and APHRS in May 2013 and by ACCF, AHA, PACES, and AEPC in June 2013.
Heart Rhythm. 2013 Dec;10(12):1932-63. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24011539?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Greif R, Bray JE, Djärv T, et al. 2024 International consensus on cardiopulmonary resuscitation and
emergency cardiovascular care science with treatment recommendations: summary from the basic life
58 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 59 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias References
support; advanced life support; pediatric life support; neonatal life support; education, implementation,
and teams; and first aid task forces. Circulation. 2024 Dec 10;150(24):e580-687.  Full text (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001288)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/39540293?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Panchal AR, Berg KM, Kudenchuk PJ, et al. 2018 American Heart Association focused
update on advanced cardiovascular life support use of antiarrhythmic drugs during and
immediately after cardiac arrest: an update to the American Heart Association Guidelines for
cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2018 Dec
4;138(23):e740-9.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000613?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%3dpubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30571262?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Panchal AR, Bartos JA, Cabañas JG, et al; Adult Basic and Advanced Life Support Writing
Group. Part 3: adult basic and advanced life support: 2020 American Heart Association
guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation.
2020 Oct 20;142(16_suppl_2):S366-468.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/
CIR.0000000000000916)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33081529?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Napolitano C, Priori SG. Diagnosis and treatment of catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia. Heart Rhythm. 2007 May;4(5):675-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17467641?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. Wilde AA, Bhuiyan ZA, Crotti L, et al. Left cardiac sympathetic denervation for catecholaminergic
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. N Engl J Med. 2008 May 8;358(19):2024-9.  Full text (http://
www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa0708006#t=article)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18463378?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Watanabe H, Chopra N, Laver D, et al. Flecainide prevents catecholaminergic polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia in mice and humans. Nat Med. 2009 Apr;15(4):380-3.  Full text (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2904954)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19330009?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Watanabe H, van der Werf C, Roses-Noguer F, et al. Effects of flecainide on exercise-induced
ventricular arrhythmias and recurrences in genotype-negative patients with catecholaminergic
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Heart Rhythm. 2013 Apr;10(4):542-7.  Full text (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3809106)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23286974?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Ortiz M, Martín A, Arribas F, et al. Randomized comparison of intravenous procainamide vs.
intravenous amiodarone for the acute treatment of tolerated wide QRS tachycardia: the PROCAMIO
study. Eur Heart J. 2017 May 1;38(17):1329-35.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article-
lookup/doi/10.1093/eurheartj/ehw230)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27354046?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Cronin EM, Bogun FM, Maury P, et al. 2019 HRS/EHRA/APHRS/LAHRS expert consensus statement
on catheter ablation of ventricular arrhythmias. J Arrhythm. 2019 May 10;35(3):323-484.  Full text
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
59
=== Page 60 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias References
REFERENCES
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6595359)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/31293696?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Morin DP, Lerman BB. Management of ventricular tachycardia in the absence of structural
heart disease. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc Med. 2007 Oct;9(5):356-63. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17897564?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Moss AJ, Zareba W, Hall WJ, et al. Prophylactic implantation of a defibrillator in patients with
myocardial infarction and reduced ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2002 Mar 21;346(12):877-83. 
Full text (http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa013474#t=article)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11907286?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Bardy GH, Lee KL, Mark DB, et al. Amiodarone or an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for
congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2005 Jan 20;352(3):225-37.  Full text (http://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJMoa043399#t=article)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15659722?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Antiarrhythmics versus Implantable Defibrillators (AVID) Investigators. A comparison of antiarrhythmic-
drug therapy with implantable defibrillators in patients resuscitated from near-fatal ventricular
arrhythmias. N Engl J Med. 1997 Nov 27;337(22):1576-83.  Full text (http://www.nejm.org/
doi/full/10.1056/NEJM199711273372202#t=article)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9411221?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Connolly SJ, Gent M, Roberts RS, et al. Canadian implantable defibrillator study (CIDS): a
randomized trial of the implantable cardioverter defibrillator against amiodarone. Circulation. 2000 Mar
21;101(11):1297-302.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/101/11/1297.full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10725290?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Kuck KH, Cappato R, Siebels J, et al. Randomized comparison of antiarrhythmic drug
therapy with implantable defibrillators in patients resuscitated from cardiac arrest: the Cardiac
Arrest Study Hamburg (CASH). Circulation. 2000 Aug 15;102(7):748-54.  Full text (http://
circ.ahajournals.org/content/102/7/748.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10942742?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Gasparini M, Proclemer A, Klersy C, et al. Effect of long-detection interval vs standard-detection
interval for implantable cardioverter-defibrillators on antitachycardia pacing and shock delivery:
the ADVANCE III randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2013 May 8;309(18):1903-11.  Full text (http://
jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1685859)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23652522?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Moss AJ, Schuger C, Beck CA, et al; MADIT-RIT Trial Investigators. Reduction in inappropriate
therapy and mortality through ICD programming. N Engl J Med. 2012 Dec 13;367(24):2275-83. 
Full text (http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1211107#t=article)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23131066?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Blomström-Lundqvist C, Traykov V, Erba PA, et al. European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA)
international consensus document on how to prevent, diagnose, and treat cardiac implantable
electronic device infections - endorsed by the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS), the Asia Pacific Heart
Rhythm Society (APHRS), the Latin American Heart Rhythm Society (LAHRS), International Society
60 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 61 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias References
for Cardiovascular Infectious Diseases (ISCVID) and the European Society of Clinical Microbiology
and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID) in collaboration with the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic
Surgery (EACTS). Europace. 2020 Apr 1;22(4):515-49.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/europace/
article/22/4/515/5614580?login=false)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31702000?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Hammill SC, Stevenson LW, Kadish AH, et al. Review of the registry's first year, data collected,
and future plans. Heart Rhythm. 2007 Sep;4(9):1260-3. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17765637?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Russo AM, Stainback RF, Bailey SR, et al. ACCF/HRS/AHA/ASE/HFSA/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR 2013
appropriate use criteria for implantable cardioverter-defibrillators and cardiac resynchronization
therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013 Mar 26;61(12):1318-68.  Full text (http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S073510971206041X)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23453819?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Tracy CM, Epstein AE, Darbar D, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS focused update of the 2008 guidelines
for device-based therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities: a report of the American College of
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines and the
Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2012 Oct 2;126(14):1784-800. [Erratum in: Circulation. 2013 Jan
22;127(3):e357-9.]  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/cir.0b013e3182618569)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22965336?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Hohnloser SH, Dorian P, Roberts R, et al, Effect of amiodarone and sotalol on ventricular defibrillation
threshold: the Optimal Pharmacological Therapy in Cardioverter/Defibrillator Patients (OPTIC) Trial.
Circulation. 2006 Jul 11;114(2):104-9.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/114/2/104.full)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16818810?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Stevenson WG, Khan H, Sager P, et al. Identification of reentry circuit sites during catheter
mapping and radiofrequency ablation of ventricular tachycardia late after myocardial infarction.
Circulation. 1993 Oct;88(4 Pt 1):1647-70. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8403311?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Reddy VY, Reynolds MR, Neuzil P, et al. Prophylactic catheter ablation for the prevention of
defibrillator therapy. N Engl J Med. 2007 Dec 27;357(26):2657-65.  Full text (http://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/NEJMoa065457#t=article)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18160685?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Alberca T, Almendral J, Sanz P, et al. Evaluation of the specificity of morphological
electrocardiographic criteria for the differential diagnosis of wide QRS complex tachycardia in patients
with intraventricular conduction defects. Circulation. 1997 Nov 18;96(10):3527-33.  Full text (http://
circ.ahajournals.org/content/96/10/3527.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9396451?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Akca F, Önsesveren I, Jordaens L, et al. Safety and efficacy of the remote magnetic navigation
for ablation of ventricular tachycardias - a systematic review. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2012
Jun;34(1):65-71.  Full text (http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10840-011-9645-2/fulltext.html)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22180126?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
61
=== Page 62 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias References
REFERENCES
58. Noten AME, Ramdat Misier NL, Kammeraad JAE, et al. The first evaluation of remote
magnetic navigation-guided pediatric ventricular arrhythmia ablation. Pediatr Cardiol. 2022
Dec;43(8):1695-703.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9587922)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35486130?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Guckel D, Niemann S, Ditzhaus M, et al. Long-term efficacy and impact on mortality of remote
magnetic navigation guided catheter ablation of ventricular arrhythmias. J Clin Med. 2021 Oct
13;10(20):4695.  Full text (https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0383/10/20/4695)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34682822?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Knutson NC, Samson PP, Hugo GD, et al. Radiation therapy workflow and dosimetric analysis
from a phase 1/2 trial of noninvasive cardiac radioablation for ventricular tachycardia. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2019 Aug 1;104(5):1114-23.  Full text (https://www.redjournal.org/article/
S0360-3016(19)30623-6/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31002942?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Page RL, Joglar JA, Caldwell MA, et al. 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the management of adult
patients with supraventricular tachycardia: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2016 Apr 5;67(13):e27-115.  Full text (http://www.onlinejacc.org/content/67/13/e27)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26409259?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Brugada J, Katritsis DG, Arbelo E, et al. 2019 ESC guidelines for the management of patients with
supraventricular tachycardia, the Task Force for the management of patients with supraventricular
tachycardia of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2020 Feb 1;41(5):655-720. 
Full text (https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/41/5/655/5556821?login=false)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31504425?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Yarlagadda RK, Iwai S, Stein KM, et al. Reversal of cardiomyopathy in patients with repetitive
monomorphic ventricular ectopy originating from the right ventricular outflow tract. Circulation. 2005
Aug 23;112(8):1092-7.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/112/8/1092.full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16103234?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 63 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Images
Images
Figure 1: Sustained (monomorphic) ventricular tachycardia
From the collection of Prof Sei Iwai; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
63
=== Page 64 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Images
IMAGES
Figure 2: Torsades de pointes
From the collections of Dr Kenneth Stein and Dr Richard Keating; used with permission
64 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 65 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Images
Figure 3: Right ventricular outflow tract tachycardia
From the collection of Prof Sei Iwai; used with permission
Figure 4: Prolonged QT: QTc 510 ms (HR 69 and QT 476)
From the collection of Prof Sei Iwai; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
65
=== Page 66 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
66 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
=== Page 67 ===
Sustained ventricular tachycardias Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Dec 20, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2024. All rights reserved.
67
=== Page 68 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Sei Iwai, MD, FACC, FHRS
Professor of Clinical Medicine
New York Medical College, Section Chief, Cardiac Electrophysiology, Westchester Medical Center Health
Network, Valhalla, NY
DISCLOSURES: SI is an author of some references cited in this topic.
// Acknowledgements:
Professor Sei Iwai would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Kenneth Stein and Dr Richard Keating, previous
contributors to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: KS declares he is an employee of and shareholder in Boston Scientific, a manufacturer
of implantable cardioverter defibrillators and ablation catheters. RK declares that he has no competing
interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Suneet Mittal, MD
Director
Electrophysiology Laboratory, The St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, NY
DISCLOSURES: SM declares that he has no competing interests.
Kenneth A. Ellenbogen, MD
Kontos Professor of Cardiology
Medical College of Virginia, Richmond, VA
DISCLOSURES: KAE declares that he has no competing interests.
Kim Rajappan, MA, MD, MRCP
Consultant Cardiologist and Electrophysiologist
Cardiac Department, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK
DISCLOSURES: KR declares that she has no competing interests.
