# Takayasu arteritis

=== Page 1 ===
Takayasu arteritis
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Jan 10, 2025
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Etiology  4
Pathophysiology  4
Classification  5
Case history  7
Diagnosis  8
Approach  8
History and exam  13
Risk factors  15
Tests  16
Differentials  21
Criteria  22
Management  25
Approach  25
Treatment algorithm overview  27
Treatment algorithm  28
Emerging  33
Secondary prevention  33
Patient discussions  33
Follow up  34
Monitoring  34
Complications  35
Prognosis  36
Guidelines  37
Diagnostic guidelines  37
Treatment guidelines  37
Online resources  38
References  39
Images  45
Disclaimer  51
=== Page 3 ===
Takayasu arteritis Overview
Summary
Takayasu arteritis is a vasculitis of large vessels that particularly affects the aorta and its primary branches.
Generally more common in women and typically presents before the age of 40 years.
Typical symptoms include limb claudication on exertion, chest pain, and systemic symptoms of weight loss,
fatigue, low-grade fever, and myalgia.
On examination, vascular bruits may be audible over the carotids, abdominal aorta, or subclavian vessels.
Unequal blood pressures may be recorded between sides, and a murmur of aortic regurgitation may be
heard if there is aortic root dilation.
The diagnosis is usually made by vascular imaging.
Glucocorticoids are initial therapy, with additional use of corticosteroid-sparing immunosuppressants.
Biologic agents are often used for refractory disease. Surgery may be required for established complications.
Long-term complications are due mainly to arterial occlusion and related damage, including limb ischemia
and cardiac and neurologic manifestations.
Definition
Takayasu arteritis is a chronic granulomatous vasculitis affecting large arteries: primarily the aorta and its
main branches. Vascular inflammation can cause stenosis, occlusion, and aneurysm formation. Symptoms
from vascular ischemia include claudication and stroke. Diminished or absent pulses and hypertension are
common. Constitutional symptoms, including fever and weight loss, are often accompanied by elevation of
acute phase markers.[1] [2] [3] [4]
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Takayasu arteritis Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
Takayasu arteritis is a rare disease. The reported incidence in the US is 2.6 cases per million population
per year in Olmsted County, Minnesota, and in Sweden the incidence has been estimated to be 1.2 cases
per million population per year.[7] [11] The incidence of Takayasu arteritis in Latin America is reported to
be similar at about 0.9 cases per million per year.[12] These figures are likely to underestimate the true
prevalence of the disease. Autopsy studies in Japan suggest a higher incidence, with evidence of Takayasu
arteritis in 1 in every 3000 autopsies.[13] In one systematic review and meta-analysis of worldwide data,
incidence was calculated to be about 1.1 per million-person years.[14]
Its distribution is worldwide, although most cases are reported in Asian populations. Although Takayasu
arteritis is often thought of as a disease of young women, the disease has variable sex predilection, with
women in Japan affected about 8 times more frequently than men, whereas in India men and women are
equally represented.[6] The peak incidence is usually in the third decade of life, although among Japanese
individuals it typically presents between the ages of 15 and 25 years. In Europeans the mean age at
diagnosis is 41 years.[2]
Disease expression varies in different populations. Compared with Japanese patients, patients in the US are
more likely to have constitutional (43% in the US versus 27% in Japan) and musculoskeletal symptoms (53%
in the US versus 6% in Japan), claudication (90% in the US versus 13% in Japan), and visual changes (30%
in the US versus 6% in Japan).[2]
Etiology
The etiology of Takayasu arteritis is unknown. Environmental and genetic factors are thought to play roles
in the development of the disease.[4] Cell-mediated immune mechanisms have been implicated.[1] Genetic
screening has shown polymorphisms in IL-12, IL-6, and IL-2 genes in a population of Turkish patients
with Takayasu arteritis.[15] HLA-Bw5 and HLA-B39.2 are reportedly increased in frequency in some
populations.[16] [17]
Pathophysiology
Takayasu arteritis is an immune-mediated vasculitis characterized by granulomatous inflammation of large
arteries.
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Takayasu arteritis Theory
Photomicrograph of the aorta from a patient with Takayasu arteritis demonstrates marked
thickening of the intimal layer and inflammatory infiltrates in the media and laminar necrosis
Used with permission from the collection of Dylan Miller, MD, Mayo Clinic
 Cell-mediated immune mechanisms have been implicated.[1] [4] Interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-17 are thought to
play an important role in the pathogenesis of Takayasu arteritis.[18] Some patients have been treated with an
IL-6 inhibitor with favorable responses.[19] [20]
The immunologic and inflammatory response seen in arteries is similar to that observed in large arteries in
giant cell arteritis.[1] [4] During the acute phase of vasculitis, inflammation begins in the vasa vasora of the
adventitia of muscular arteries.[1] [9] T cells are prominent in the initial cellular response, and antiendothelial
cell antibodies may also be involved.[1] [4] [21] [22]
Classification
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Takayasu arteritis Theory
THEORY
2012 International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference on the
Nomenclature of Vasculitides[5]
Categorizes vasculitis based upon the predominant type of vessels involved, and other features including
etiology, pathogenesis, type of inflammation, favored organ distribution, clinical manifestations, genetic
predispositions, and distinctive demographic characteristics.
• Large vessel vasculitis
• Takayasu arteritis
• Giant cell arteritis
• Medium vessel vasculitis
• Polyarteritis nodosa
• Kawasaki disease
• Small vessel vasculitis
• ANCA-associated vasculitis
• Microscopic polyangiitis
• Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly known as Wegener granulomatosis)
• Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss)
• Immune complex vasculitis
• Anti-glomerular basement membrane (anti-GBM) disease
• Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis
• IgA vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein)
• Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
• Variable vessel vasculitis
• Behçet disease
• Cogan syndrome
• Single-organ vasculitis
• Vasculitis associated with systemic disease
• Vasculitis associated with probable etiology
Angiographic classification of Takayasu arteritis[6]
Classification is based on the vessels involved in the inflammatory process as seen on angiography.
• Type I: Branches of the aortic arch
• Type IIa: Ascending aorta, aortic arch, and branches of the aortic arch
• Type IIb: Ascending aorta, aortic arch, and its branches and thoracic descending aorta
• Type III: Thoracic descending aorta, abdominal aorta, and/or renal arteries
• Type IV: Abdominal aorta and/or renal arteries
• Type V: Features of types IIb and IV
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Takayasu arteritis Theory
Case history
Case history #1
A 28-year-old woman presents with new left-arm pain. She was previously well but for 2 months has had
episodes of low-grade fever, night sweats, and arthralgia. She works as a store clerk and has noticed
left-arm pain when she stocks shelves. Her only medication is an oral contraceptive. She does not
smoke cigarettes. On examination, her blood pressure is 126/72 mmHg in her right arm, but it cannot be
measured in her left arm. The left radial pulse cannot be detected. There is a bruit over the left subclavian
artery. Carotid pulses are normal but there is a bruit over the right carotid artery. Femoral and pedal
pulses are normal and no abdominal bruits are heard. The left hand is cool but has no other evidence of
ischemia.
Case history #2
A 39-year-old woman presents with headaches of insidious onset over 3 months. She has lost 3 kilograms
during this time but feels otherwise well. On examination, bilateral blood pressures taken in the arms
are 190/110 mmHg on the right and 200/110 mmHg on the left. She is taking a multivitamin but no other
medications. For the past 20 years she has smoked 10 cigarettes a day. Urinalysis reveals an estimated
protein of 360 mg/24 hour.
Other presentations
Nonspecific constitutional symptoms, including fever, weight loss, and fatigue, are common.[1][4][7]
Patients may also present with an absent pulse or immeasurable blood pressure in 1 extremity.[8] New-
onset hypertension or aortic regurgitation may be present. Coronary artery involvement can lead to
angina pectoris, but pericarditis and congestive heart failure are uncommon presentations. Pulmonary
artery involvement may result in chest pain, dyspnea, or hemoptysis. Involvement of cranial arteries
can present as a headache, transient ischemic attack, or stroke. Visual symptoms may include blurring,
scotoma, diplopia, and amaurosis fugax. The retinal arteriovenous anastomoses described by Takayasu
are rare.[9] Mesenteric artery involvement can cause abdominal pain or gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
Vascular bruits are often found on auscultation.[7] [8] Erythema nodosum is occasionally noted.[10]
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Approach
Establishing the diagnosis of Takayasu arteritis can be difficult, as it may present with nonspecific systemic
symptoms including fever, night sweats, and weight loss. Other presenting features may include ischemic
symptoms of extremity claudication, transient ischemic attack, stroke, or chest pain. Laboratory tests are
nonspecific, reflecting inflammation. Biopsy of involved vessels is not usually feasible, and the diagnosis
relies on vascular imaging.[1] [2][4] [9]
History
In the early stages, constitutional symptoms may include weight loss, low-grade fever, and general
fatigue, and these are often ascribed to another cause. The diagnosis of Takayasu arteritis should
be considered in patients under age 40 years with symptoms of vascular ischemia. Although
relatively uncommon at presentation, claudication in the upper or lower limb may develop over time.
Development of collateral circulation patterns can lead to a variety of other findings, especially subclavian
steal syndrome caused by a stenotic lesion proximal to the origin of the vertebral artery causing
lightheadedness on exercise of the upper limb.
Less common manifestations of Takayasu arteritis include myalgia and arthralgia. Pulmonary arteries
are often involved in Takayasu arteritis but rarely cause symptoms. Chest pain, shortness of breath, and
hemoptysis may be due to pulmonary artery stenosis, coronary artery involvement, or heart failure from
aortic dilation. Pericarditis is possible but uncommon. Involvement of carotid and vertebral arteries can
cause cerebral ischemia, which may in turn cause visual symptoms (e.g., diplopia, amaurosis fugax, or
scotoma), vertigo, lightheadedness, syncope, or headache. History of a previous transient ischemic attack
(TIA), or a TIA as a presenting symptom in a young patient, may indicate inflammation of the vertebral or
carotid vessels. Less commonly, the mesenteric vessels may be involved, causing abdominal pain and
diarrhea.[1] [2] [4] [9] [23] [24]
Examination
Careful examination of the vascular system is vital. Cool extremities and absent pulses (most commonly
the radial pulse) may be noted, and a difference in blood pressure of >10 mmHg on each arm may be
significant. If Takayasu arteritis is suspected, it is advisable to measure the blood pressure on both arms
and legs to look for a difference. Hypertension may be a feature, but the blood pressure can also be
unusually low if there is a stenosis just proximal to the area of blood pressure measurement. The carotid
pulses may feel weaker, and a bruit might be audible. Bruits may also be heard over the supraclavicular
region or abdominal aorta. A cardiac murmur may be audible if there is aortic root involvement and aortic
regurgitation. Evidence of a previous stroke may suggest central nervous system involvement. The
arteriovenous anastomoses seen on examination of the retina and originally described by Takayasu in
1908 are rarely seen today.[1] [2] [9] Less common manifestations include the appearance of erythema
nodosum or pyoderma gangrenosum on the arms or legs.
Investigations
Acute phase markers, including C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), are
usually elevated in patients with active disease. They can be followed as markers of disease activity.[1]
[2][4] [9] CRP is preferred to ESR in the acute phase as it has increased sensitivity and specificity to
detect acute inflammation.[25] Other nonspecific markers of inflammation such as normocytic anemia and
thrombocytosis may also be noted. There are no specific laboratory tests for Takayasu arteritis. 
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
Imaging studies, including computed tomography and magnetic resonance vascular imaging, are
important modalities for establishing a diagnosis of Takayasu arteritis and can be helpful in monitoring
disease activity.[26] Catheter angiogram is not recommended due to its invasive nature, unless required
prior to revascularization procedures.
Magnetic resonance angiogram of the aortic arch and major vessels showing occlusion of bilateral subclavian
arteries; left common carotid artery has small diameter; proximal vertebral arteries are not identified
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Computed tomography angiogram, with 3D reconstruction of the aortic arch
and major vessels, showing proximal occlusion of the left subclavian artery and
patent left vertebral artery distal to the occlusion (left vertebral steal syndrome)
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
Computed tomography angiogram, with 3D reconstruction of the aortic arch and major
vessels, showing narrowing of the left common carotid artery and left subclavian artery
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Computed tomography angiogram with 3D reconstruction showing bilateral renal artery stenosis
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
Positron emission tomography with radiolabeled fluorodeoxyglucose (PET-FDG) can be used to identify
inflammation in the large arteries, and is therefore a useful technique to establish diagnosis. PET-FDG
can also be used for assessing disease activity over time.[26] [27]
Noninvasive vascular ultrasonography is a useful tool for initial evaluation of a patient with suspected
Takayasu arteritis.[1] [2] [9] [24] [28] [29]
Histopathology
Biopsy cannot usually be obtained from one of the vessels typically involved, due to the vessels' size and
function as large arteries, and is therefore not part of the usual approach to diagnosis. Biopsy specimens
from patients who have undergone revascularization procedures secondary to complications of Takayasu
arteritis may show histopathologic findings identical to those of giant cell arteritis. Temporal artery biopsy
is not helpful in making the diagnosis.[1] [2] [9] [24]
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
upper or lower limb claudication (common)
• Progressive symptoms of claudication are more common than claudication as a presenting feature.
A history of pain on exertion of the upper or lower limb may be given; upper limb claudication is more
common.
absent pulse(s) (common)
• Often found to have unilateral absence of brachial, radial, or carotid pulse due to occlusive disease.
unequal blood pressures (common)
• A discrepancy of >10 mmHg between the 2 arms may be noted.
vascular bruits (common)
• Bruits may be heard over subclavian, carotid, or abdominal vessels due to eccentric flow.
low-grade fever (common)
• A systemic sign, often present during the acute phase of inflammation.
Other diagnostic factors
transient ischemic attack (TIA) (common)
• History of a previous TIA, or a TIA as a presenting complaint in a young patient, may indicate
inflammation of the vertebral or carotid vessels.
myalgia (common)
• A systemic symptom, seen in the acute phase; may be accompanied by a rise in inflammatory
markers.
arthralgia (common)
• A systemic symptom, seen in the acute phase; may be accompanied by a rise in inflammatory
markers.
weight loss (common)
• A systemic symptom, seen in the acute phase; may be accompanied by a rise in inflammatory
markers.
fatigue (common)
• A systemic symptom, seen in the acute phase; may be accompanied by a rise in inflammatory
markers.
dizziness on upper-limb exertion (common)
• May result from subclavian steal syndrome due to a stenotic lesion developing proximal to the origin of
the vertebral artery.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
hypertension (common)
• May develop due to involvement and narrowing of the renal arteries. Can be falsely low if there is a
narrowed segment proximally.
stroke (uncommon)
• Evidence of a previous stroke may be suggestive of central nervous system involvement and arteritis
affecting the vertebral or carotid vessels.
chest pain (uncommon)
• This can be a feature of Takayasu arteritis if the coronary vasculature is involved, causing coronary
ischemia, or if pulmonary arteries are affected.
abdominal pain (uncommon)
• May result from involvement of the mesenteric branches of the aorta.
diarrhea (uncommon)
• May result from involvement of the mesenteric branches of the aorta.
shortness of breath (uncommon)
• Due to pulmonary artery stenosis, coronary artery involvement, or aortic regurgitation.
hemoptysis (uncommon)
• May result from pulmonary artery stenosis or heart failure due to aortic root dilation and aortic
regurgitation.
night sweats (uncommon)
• Constitutional symptom that may be reported during the acute phase.
vertigo (uncommon)
• May result from cerebral ischemia.
syncope (uncommon)
• May result from cerebral ischemia.
headache (uncommon)
• May result from cerebral ischemia or hypertension.
heart murmur (uncommon)
• Aortic regurgitation may result from aortic root dilation.
visual symptoms (uncommon)
• Due to cerebral ischemia secondary to carotid and vertebral involvement. May include amaurosis
fugax, scotoma, or diplopia. The retinopathy originally described by Mikoto Takayasu is rarely seen and
is usually a late sign.
erythema nodosum (uncommon)
• Uncommonly found on the arms or legs.
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
pyoderma gangrenosum (uncommon)
• Uncommonly found on the legs.
Risk factors
Strong
genetic predisposition
• Takayasu arteritis is most prevalent in Japan, Southeast Asia, India, and Mexico.[1] [2] [11] [13]
Polymorphisms in interleukin genes have been demonstrated in a population of Turkish patients with
Takayasu arteritis, and certain HLA antigens have been found in greater-than-expected frequency in
some patient populations.[15] [16]
female sex
• Takayasu arteritis is generally more common in females.[1] [6]
age <40 years
• Patients are usually under age 40 years at presentation.[1] [7][11]
Asian ethnicity
• There are more reported cases in Asian populations compared with non-Asian, although the reasons
for this are unclear, and there may be a genetic basis confounding this association.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
CRP
• A marker of inflammation. Lacks specificity, as it can be raised by any
inflammatory process. Sensitivity is moderate.[1] [2] [4] [24] [30] CRP
is preferred to ESR in the acute phase as it has increased sensitivity
and specificity to detect acute inflammation.[25]
typically elevated with
active disease
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
• A marker of inflammation, but it lacks specificity and sensitivity.
Most patients with elevated ESR do not have Takayasu arteritis,
and patients with active disease can have a normal ESR.[1] [2] [4]
[24] [30] CRP is preferred in the acute phase as it has increased
sensitivity and specificity to detect acute inflammation.[25]
typically >50 mm/hour
with active disease
computed tomography angiography (CTA)
• CTA may be performed with helical scanning and 3D reconstruction.
It has high sensitivity and specificity (over 95%) for the diagnosis
of Takayasu arteritis. Catheter angiogram is not recommended
due to its invasive nature, unless required prior to revascularization
procedures.[26] [29] [31]
segmental narrowing or
occlusion, occasionally
dilation, of affected
vessels; aortic aneurysms
may be seen; thickening
of vessel walls may be
seen but is of uncertain
significance
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
Test Result
Computed tomography angiogram, with 3D reconstruction
of the aortic arch and major vessels, showing proximal
occlusion of the left subclavian artery and patent left vertebral
artery distal to the occlusion (left vertebral steal syndrome)
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
Computed tomography angiogram, with 3D reconstruction
of the aortic arch and major vessels, showing narrowing of
the left common carotid artery and left subclavian artery
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
Computed tomography angiogram with 3D
reconstruction showing bilateral renal artery stenosis
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
Test Result
magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
• MRA is used to identify arterial involvement, and it may be useful in
the assessment of disease activity, with vessel wall thickening and
edema thought to reflect active disease.[32]
Magnetic resonance angiogram of the aortic arch and major vessels
showing occlusion of bilateral subclavian arteries; left common carotid
artery has small diameter; proximal vertebral arteries are not identified
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
segmental narrowing,
occlusion, or dilation of
involved arteries; vessel
wall inflammation may be
detectable
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Other tests to consider
Test Result
Doppler ultrasound
• Particularly useful in the early vascular evaluation of patients with
suspected Takayasu arteritis, as it is a noninvasive procedure.
Abdominal ultrasound may reveal mesenteric or renal artery stenosis,
and transthoracic/transesophageal studies can detect abnormalities
in the upper aorta and subclavian and carotid arteries.[33]
segmental narrowing,
occlusion, and/or dilation
of involved arteries
positron emission tomography with radiolabeled
fluorodeoxyglucose (PET-FDG)
• Can be used to identify inflammation in the large arteries and is
therefore a useful technique to establish diagnosis. PET-FDG can
also be used for assessing disease activity over time.[26] [27]
• PET-FDG performs comparably to CTA for the detection of aortitis.
[26] [34]
may show increased
uptake in actively
inflamed arterial
segments
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Giant cell arteritis (GCA) • Patients are usually older;
average age is 74 years.
May have polymyalgia
rheumatica with proximal
myalgia. Jaw claudication is
common. Lower extremity
involvement is less common.
• Imaging with CT or magnetic
resonance angiography;
GCA is more likely to have
cranial artery involvement
and less likely to have lower
extremity involvement.
Essential hypertension • Intact pulses and the
absence of bruits. No
marked difference in blood
pressure between each side.
• Clinical diagnosis.
• No stenoses on vascular
imaging.
Syphilis • Firm painless ulcer at site of
primary inoculation, usually
genital region. Symmetric
non-itchy rash accompanies
systemic symptoms.
• Positive syphilis serology.
• Catheter or CT angiogram:
typical calcification of the
proximal ascending aorta.
Tuberculosis (TB) • Persistent productive cough.
Recent travel to an endemic
area.
• Mantoux test: elicits delayed
hypersensitivity reaction,
which will be positive in
people with latent infection,
previously cleared infection,
or in those previously
immunized.
• Chest x-ray: may show
evidence of pulmonary TB
foci.
• Sputum culture: takes 4 to
12 weeks to culture acid-
fast bacilli but is diagnostic if
found.
• Interferon-gamma release
assay: blood test to detect
interferon gamma production
when incubated with TB
bacilli. Can identify active
and latent infection.
Spondyloarthropathy • Back pain and stiffness
lasting more than 1 hour,
particularly in the mornings.
Peripheral arthritis. May
be preceded by urethritis
or cervicitis in the case
of reactive arthritis.
Accompanying symptoms
may include psoriasis,
palmar-plantar pustulosis,
iritis, uveitis, or conjunctivitis.
• X-ray of spine: may
demonstrate sacroiliitis.
• X-ray of peripheral joint
affected by arthritis may
show periarticular osteolysis
in psoriatic arthritis.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Behçet disease • A triad of oral and genital
ulceration with uveitis.
Often accompanied by a
peripheral arthritis. May
have thrombotic arterial and
venous occlusions.
• Angiography: reveals
saccular dilation of involved
arteries or thrombotic
occlusion.
• Cerebrospinal fluid
examination supportive but
not diagnostic; increased
inflammatory cells and
protein.
Kawasaki disease • Typically affects children
under age 5 years.
High-grade fever with
strawberry-tongue-marked
lymphadenopathy. Red eyes
with uveitis or conjunctivitis.
Rash and peeling of the skin
on the palms and soles may
be seen.
• Clinical diagnosis using set
criteria.
• Angiography reveals
saccular dilation of coronary
arteries if affected.
Marfan syndrome • Typically tall people with
long limbs. May have a
family history of Marfan
syndrome. Susceptible to
lens dislocation.
• Systemic signs and
symptoms absent.
• Clinical diagnosis.
• Family history.
• Genetic testing rarely carried
out.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome • May have hypermobile joints
or paper-thin skin scars.
• Systemic signs and
symptoms absent
• Angiography: if vascular wall
collagen affected, may reveal
saccular dilation of involved
arteries.
• Genetic testing.
Atherosclerosis • More common in men, may
have associated risk factors
of hypertension, smoking,
diabetes mellitus, and
raised cholesterol. Typically,
patients are aged over 40
years.
• Angiography: typical abrupt
narrowing of artery rather
than tapered narrowing.
Lesions usually at the
vessel origin and carotid
bifurcations.
Fibromuscular dysplasia • Pulses present but may be
diminished. Hypertension
common and most
commonly affects renal and
carotid arteries.
• Angiography: characteristic
beading of affected arteries.
Aorta not usually involved.
Criteria
2022 American College of Rheumatology/EULAR classification
criteria for Takayasu arteritis[35]
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
The following criteria established by collaboration between the American College of Rheumatology and the
(EULAR) are validated and intended for the purpose of classification of vasculitis and are not appropriate for
use to establish a diagnosis of vasculitis. The aim of the classification criteria is to differentiate cases of TAK
from similar types of vasculitis in research settings. The criteria should only be applied when a diagnosis of
large- or medium vessel vasculitis has been made and all potential “vasculitis mimics” have been excluded.
It was created by an international Steering Committee comprising clinician investigators with expertise in
vasculitis, statisticians, and data managers to update the previous 1990 American College of Rheumatology
(ACR) endorsed classification criteria for Takayasu arteritis. The final criteria include 10 clinical items that
are routinely assessed during clinical evaluation of patients with Takayasu arteritis. The criteria highlight
the importance of clinical symptoms, vascular physical exam, and vascular imaging as important disease
classifiers.
Classification criteria for Takayasu arteritis:
Considerations when applying these criteria:
• These classification criteria should be applied to classify the patient as having Takayasu arteritis when
a diagnosis of medium vessel or large vessel vasculitis has been made
• Alternate diagnoses mimicking vasculitis should be excluded prior to applying the criteria.
Absolute requirements:
• Age ≤ 60 years at time of diagnosis
• Evidence of vasculitis on imaging¹.
Additional clinical criteria:
• Female sex +1
• Angina or ischemic cardiac pain +2
• Arm or leg claudication +2
• Vascular bruit² +2
• Reduced pulse in upper extremity³ +2
• Carotid artery abnormality⁴ +2
• Systolic blood pressure difference in arms ≥ 20 mmHg +1.
Additional imaging criteria:
• Number of affected arterial territories (select one)⁵
• One arterial territory +1
• Two arterial territories +2
• Three or more arterial territories +3
• Symmetric involvement of paired arteries⁶ +1
• Abdominal aorta involvement with renal or mesenteric involvement⁷ +3
Sum the scores for 10 items, if present. A score of ≥ 5 points is needed for the classification of Takayasu
Arteritis.
1. Evidence of vasculitis in the aorta or branch arteries must be confirmed by vascular imaging (e.g.,
computed tomographic/catheter-based/magnetic resonance angiography, ultrasound, positron
emission tomography).
2. Bruit detected by auscultation of a large artery, including the aorta, carotid, subclavian, axillary,
brachial, renal, or iliofemoral arteries.
3. Reduction or absence of pulse by physical exam of the axillary, brachial, or radial arteries.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Takayasu arteritis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
4. Reduction or absence of pulse of the carotid artery or tenderness of the carotid artery.
5. Number of arterial territories with luminal damage (e.g., stenosis, occlusion, or aneurysm) detected
by angiography or ultrasonography from the following nine territories: thoracic aorta, abdominal aorta,
mesenteric, left or right carotid, left or right subclavian, left or right renal arteries.
6. Bilateral luminal damage (stenosis, occlusion, aneurysm) detected by angiography or ultrasonography
involving the abdominal aorta and either the renal or mesenteric arteries.
The final 2022 American College of Rheumatology/EULAR Classification Criteria for Takayasu arteritis
Grayson et al. Arthritis Rheumatol 2022;74(12):1872-80; used with permission
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Takayasu arteritis Management
Approach
The goal of treatment for Takayasu arteritis is to manage systemic symptoms and suppress vascular
inflammation to prevent damage to vessels and the tissues they supply. Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of
treatment, with immunosuppressive agents also used for the majority of patients. Surgical or percutaneous
revascularization procedures may be required to improve blood flow or prevent rupture of aneurysms. Low-
dose aspirin should be considered to help prevent ischemic complications.
Initial presentation
Oral glucocorticoids should be started. No studies have established the optimal way to taper
glucocorticoids, but most follow the regimen originally described in the cohort from the National Institutes
of Health (NIH).[8][26] [36]
Pulse intravenous glucocorticoids have been tried in some patients with central nervous system
symptoms and for patients with life- or organ-threatening disease, but there are no data to support their
use.[3]
During treatment, patients should be evaluated regularly by clinical examination and measurement of
inflammatory markers (i.e., erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein); initially, this may
be every few days. Vascular imaging studies such as computed tomography or magnetic resonance
angiography should be performed every 3 to 12 months during the active phase of treatment and annually
thereafter. Low-dose aspirin should be considered to help prevent ischemic complications.[26] Antiplatelet
therapy is individualized, taking into account the patient’s risk of ischemic events and risk of bleeding.[3]
[26]
A critical issue is in trying to determine whether or not disease is active. Constitutional symptoms are
frequent when Takayasu arteritis is active. However, lack of such symptoms does not mean that the
disease is inactive. New vascular lesions can develop even when no other signs, symptoms, or laboratory
features of disease activity are present. If new vascular lesions are seen, the disease is considered to be
active. Conversely, acute phase markers may be elevated from other causes and not indicate disease
activity. Careful evaluation is required.
Corticosteroid-sparing therapy
The majority of patients will go into remission with glucocorticoid therapy. However, relapse occurs in
more than 50% of patients during dose tapering. Therefore, European League Against Rheumatism
(EULAR) and ACR guidelines recommend early initiation of corticosteroid-sparing immunosuppressive
agents such as methotrexate, leflunomide, azathioprine, or mycophenolate.[26] [37] [38]
In patients with severe or life- or organ-threatening disease, use of cyclophosphamide is rarely indicated.
However, the benefit of using cyclophosphamide needs to be considered carefully in the context of its
known toxicity, particularly premature ovarian failure and long-term risk of secondary malignancies.[39]
There is no evidence to advise on discontinuation of immunosuppressive therapy, and this will depend on
individual circumstances.
Refractory to glucocorticoids and additional immunosuppression
Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha antagonists, primarily infliximab, have also been used successfully in
the management of Takayasu arteritis when immunosuppressive agents and glucocorticoid therapy have
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Takayasu arteritis Management
MANAGEMENT
failed to control disease activity. These agents are used in addition to glucocorticoids as a corticosteroid-
sparing agent.[40] [41] [42] ACR guidelines suggest considering the use of a TNF-alpha antagonist as
upfront corticosteroid-sparing therapy.[26]
Several small case series of patients treated with tocilizumab, an interleukin (IL)-6 inhibitor, have been
reported. In general, most patients have had favorable responses, with corticosteroid-sparing effect,
although disease relapse may still occur.[19] [43] Tocilizumab was evaluated in a double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial in patients with refractory Takayasu arteritis. The primary endpoint of the trial (time to
relapse) was not met in the intent-to-treat analysis (P=0.06). However, a favorable response was seen in
a subset of patients.[20] The ACR recommends the use of other nonglucocorticoid immunosuppressive
therapy over tocilizumab as initial therapy. It recommends adding a TNF-alpha antagonist over adding
tocilizumab in refractory Takayasu arteritis. It recognizes that some practitioners favor TNF inhibition,
while others favor IL-6 inhibition in this situation. Overall, the voting panel favored a TNF-alpha antagonist
over tocilizumab, since there is more clinical experience with and data on TNF-alpha antagonists in
Takayasu arteritis compared to tocilizumab. Tocilizumab should be considered, especially when TNF-
alpha antagonists are contraindicated.[3]
Nonbiologic immunosuppressive agents may be continued or tapered.[43]
Symptoms of intermittent claudication or ischemic organ
dysfunction
Surgical intervention may be required in patients with severe complications of Takayasu arteritis. Vascular
lesions are usually not reversible with immunosuppression alone. Therefore, patients with significant
limb claudication or severe ischemic organ dysfunction may require surgical intervention. Percutaneous
angioplasty can be effective in the short term, but restenosis is common.[44] Good long-term outcomes
have been reported with vascular bypass surgery.[45] [46] Patients with progressive dilation of the aorta
may require surgical repair.[47] Except for emergency indications, vascular interventions should preferably
be performed when the disease is in remission and inflammation is under control.
Prevention of complications from long-term glucocorticoid use
Prolonged glucocorticoid treatment can lead to significant morbidity. Attention to potential side effects
is critical. Long-term glucocorticoid therapy increases the risk of osteoporosis, and the greatest amount
of bone loss occurs in the first 6 to 12 months of therapy. Prevention of glucocorticoid-induced bone
loss by treatment with calcium, vitamin D, and bisphosphonates is recommended. See Osteoporosis
(Management approach) .
Glucocorticoid-induced diabetes mellitus is a potential side effect of therapy, and a high index of suspicion
is required.
Due to the immunosuppressive effects of glucocorticoids, influenza and pneumococcal vaccination
are recommended, and, while the daily prednisone dose is greater than 20 mg/day, prophylaxis for 
Pneumocystis jirovecii  pneumonia is advised.
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Takayasu arteritis Management
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute ( summary )
all patients
1st glucocorticoid
plus immunosuppressant
adjunct low-dose aspirin
adjunct biologic agent
adjunct evaluation for surgery or endovascular
procedure
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Takayasu arteritis Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute
all patients
1st glucocorticoid
Primary options
» prednisone: 1 mg/kg/day orally initially, then
taper according to response, usual starting
dose 40-60 mg/day
» Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of therapy to
suppress vascular inflammation and systemic
inflammatory symptoms. Duration of therapy
varies, but dose can be reduced once signs and
symptoms have diminished and acute phase
markers have normalized.
» A common tapering regimen is to reduce
prednisone by 5 mg/week until reaching a
dose of 20 mg/day. Thereafter, the taper rate
is decreased to 2.5 mg/week until reaching
a dose of 10 mg/day. Thereafter, the dose is
lowered by 1 mg/day each week, as long as
disease does not become more active.[8] The
2018 European League Against Rheumatism
(EULAR) recommendations for management
of large vessel vasculitis suggest reducing
prednisone to a dose of 15-20 mg/day within
2 to 3 months, and then to ≤10 mg/day after 1
year.[38]
» Glucocorticoid tapering may have to be
stopped and the dose increased if there is return
of disease activity.
» Long-term glucocorticoid therapy increases the
risk of osteoporosis, and the greatest amount
of bone loss occurs in the first 6-12 months
of therapy. Risk is proportional to cumulative
glucocorticoid dose, so dose should be reduced
as soon as possible. It is important to prevent
bone loss by ensuring adequate dietary calcium
intake and prophylactic use of bisphosphonates
and vitamin D3/calcium supplementation. See
Osteoporosis .
» Glucocorticoid-induced diabetes mellitus is a
potential side effect of therapy, and a high index
of suspicion is required.
» Due to the immunosuppressive effects of
glucocorticoids, influenza and pneumococcal
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Takayasu arteritis Management
Acute
vaccination are recommended, and, while the
daily prednisone dose is greater than 20 mg/
day, prophylaxis for  Pneumocystis jirovecii 
pneumonia is advised. See Pneumocystis
jirovecii pneumonia .
plus immunosuppressant
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» methotrexate: 15-25 mg orally/
subcutaneously once weekly on the same
day each week
--AND--
» leucovorin: 10 mg orally every 6 hours for
10 doses starting 10 hours after methotrexate
dose
-or-
» folic acid (vitamin B9): 1 mg orally once
daily
Secondary options
» azathioprine: 2 mg/kg/day orally
OR
» mycophenolate mofetil: 1 to 1.5 g orally
twice daily
OR
» leflunomide: 20 mg orally once daily
Tertiary options
» cyclophosphamide: 2 mg/kg/day orally
» Relapse occurs in more than 50% of patients
during glucocorticoid tapering. Nonglucocorticoid
immunosuppressive agents are recommended
in addition to glucocorticoids over monotherapy
with glucocorticoids to minimize glucocorticoid-
related toxicity.[3] Methotrexate is often used
as the initial agent, but other therapies such as
azathioprine, leflunomide, or mycophenolate
can be considered as well. Glucocorticoid
monotherapy can be considered for mild disease
or if the diagnosis is uncertain.[3] [37] [38]
» In an open-label study, methotrexate was
effective as a corticosteroid-sparing agent for a
subset of patients with Takayasu arteritis.[37]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Takayasu arteritis Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
» Azathioprine or mycophenolate or leflunomide
can be considered for patients who are intolerant
to, or relapse while on, methotrexate.[8] [48]
» In patients with severe or life- or organ-
threatening disease, use of cyclophosphamide
may be indicated. However, the benefit of
cyclophosphamide needs to be considered
carefully in the context of its known toxicity,
particularly premature ovarian failure, and long-
term risk of secondary malignancies.[39]
» There is no evidence to advise on
discontinuation of immunosuppressive therapy,
and this will depend on individual circumstances.
adjunct low-dose aspirin
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» aspirin: 75 mg orally once daily
» Low-dose aspirin should be considered to help
prevent ischemic complications.[26] Antiplatelet
therapy is individualized, taking into account
the patient’s risk of ischemic events and risk of
bleeding.[3] [26]
» If used, aspirin is usually stopped 1 week prior
to any surgical procedure.
adjunct biologic agent
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» infliximab: 3-5 mg/kg intravenously as a
single dose at 0, 2, and 6 weeks, then every
4-8 weeks thereafter
Secondary options
» tocilizumab: 6 mg/kg intravenously every
4 weeks, maximum 600 mg/dose; 162 mg
subcutaneously once weekly
» Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha antagonist
therapy may be considered with persistent active
disease despite treatment with glucocorticoids
and immunosuppressive agents.
» In a pilot study of relapsing Takayasu arteritis,
anti-TNF therapy resulted in improvement in
93% of patients and sustained remission in 67%.
Most patients in this study were treated with
infliximab.[40]
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Takayasu arteritis Management
Acute
» Retrospective reviews also support the use of
anti-TNF therapy for refractory disease.[41] [42]
» Several small case series of patients
treated with tocilizumab, an interleukin (IL)-6
inhibitor, have been reported. In general, most
patients have had favorable responses, with
corticosteroid-sparing effect, although disease
relapse may still occur.[19] [43] Tocilizumab was
evaluated in a double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial in patients with refractory Takayasu arteritis.
The primary endpoint of the trial (time to relapse)
was not met in the intent-to-treat analysis
(P=0.06). However, a favorable response was
seen in a subset of patients.[20] The ACR
recommends the use of other nonglucocorticoid
immunosuppressive therapy over tocilizumab
as initial therapy. It recommends adding a TNF-
alpha antagonist over adding tocilizumab in
refractory Takayasu arteritis. It recognizes that
some practitioners favor TNF inhibition, while
others favor IL-6 inhibition in this situation.
Overall, the voting panel favored a TNF-alpha
antagonist over tocilizumab, since there is more
clinical experience with and data on TNF-alpha
antagonists in Takayasu arteritis compared to
tocilizumab. Tocilizumab should be considered,
especially when TNF-alpha antagonists are
contraindicated.[3]
» There is no evidence to advise on
discontinuation of immunosuppressive therapy,
and this will depend on individual circumstances.
adjunct evaluation for surgery or endovascular
procedure
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Vascular lesions are not usually reversible with
immunosuppression alone. Therefore, patients
with significant limb claudication or severe
ischemic organ dysfunction may require surgical
intervention. Some reports have indicated
good short-term outcomes with percutaneous
intervention for vascular stenoses in patients
with Takayasu arteritis. However, restenoses
are common with this intervention, and bypass
surgery often yields better long-term results.[8]
[44]
» Patients with aneurysmal disease of the
aorta may require surgical repair.[47] Except for
emergency indications, vascular interventions
should preferably be performed when the
disease is in remission and inflammation is
under control. Patients with active disease
requiring operation are more likely to require
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Takayasu arteritis Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
revision.[45] Therefore, control of inflammation
prior to vascular surgery is important to improve
surgical outcome. Long-term complications may
include anastomotic aneurysms and congestive
heart failure.[47]
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Takayasu arteritis Management
Emerging
Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors
JAK inhibitors (e.g., tofacitinib, upadacitinib) inhibit the activity of one or more JAK enzymes and block
signaling of cytokines implicated in Takayasu arteritis pathogenesis (type 1 and 2 interferons, interleukin
[IL]-6, IL-12, IL-17, and IL-23). They also suppress tissue-resident memory T cells and reduce inflammatory-
related vascular damage.[49] [50] [51] Case reports and one prospective observational study show positive
results in patients with Takayasu arteritis (clinical improvement, lower radiologic disease progression,
superior to methotrexate) for tofacitinib. There is a current ongoing randomized controlled trial now in phase 4
comparing methotrexate and tofacitinib.[52] There is one ongoing RCT evaluating the efficacy of upadacitinib
in combination with corticosteroids, compared with placebo and corticosteroids.[53] JAK inhibitors are not
included in the 2018 EULAR recommendations or the 2021 ACR guidelines.
Abatacept
T-cell-mediated mechanisms are involved in the pathogenesis of Takayasu arteritis. Abatacept inhibits
activation of T cells. However, in one randomized clinical trial, addition of abatacept to a treatment regimen
with prednisone did not reduce the risk of relapse in patients with Takayasu arteritis.[54] Abatacept is not
currently recommended in guidelines due to lacking evidence for efficacy.[3]
Secukinumab
Secukinumab is a human monoclonal antibody that selectively binds to interleukin 17A (IL-17A). IL-17 has
been implicated in the pathogenesis of Takayasu arteritis, as elevated levels of this cytokine and expansion
of Th17 cells are seen in patients with this disease.[18] A 2023 trial evaluated the efficacy of secukinumab
in patients with refractory Takayasu arteritis. In a single-center open-label trial, 19 patients were treated
with secukinumab and compared with 34 patients treated with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha inhibitors.
The overall efficacy of secukinumab was similar to that of TNF-alpha inhibitors with complete response and
partial response rates of 52.6% and 64.7%, respectively, at 6 months.[55] While encouraging, these results
require future validation in randomized trials.
Secondary prevention
As the precise etiology of Takayasu arteritis and causes of flare-ups in disease activity are unknown, there
are no known specific preventive actions. Management of hypertension is important to prevent further
vascular damage. Attention to osteoporosis screening and management is crucial, given the need for
glucocorticoid therapy. Patients require influenza and pneumococcal immunizations annually. Use of
prophylactic antibiotic therapy to prevent  Pneumocystis jirovecii  pneumonia is important, especially when
the prednisone dose is more than 20 mg daily. Atherosclerotic vascular disease can further complicate the
vascular damage caused by Takayasu arteritis; thus, control of other risk factors is important.
Patient discussions
Measures to help with control of hypertension, such as following a low-salt diet, are important to
prevent damage to the arteries leading to stroke, heart attack, or kidney failure. A program of gradually
increasing exercise can help form a collateral circulation, which provides new pathways for blood to
reach organs and limbs and lessens claudication symptoms. Stopping smoking and controlling blood
fats, including cholesterol, is essential to good general health and to the health of the arteries. General
health measures also include keeping immunizations up to date, especially if the patient is maintained on
immunosuppressive therapy.  [Vasculitis Foundation] (http://www.vasculitisfoundation.org)   [Medline Plus:
Takayasu arteritis] (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/001250.htm)
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Takayasu arteritis Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Monitoring
Monitoring
The monitoring interval should vary inversely with the level of disease activity, being shorter for those with
more active disease. However, as the disease may become active without new constitutional symptoms,
regular follow-up is needed. In addition to history and physical examination, erythrocyte sedimentation
rate, C-reactive protein, and complete blood count should be checked at each visit. Vascular imaging
studies such as computed tomography or magnetic resonance angiography should be performed every 3
to 12 months during the active phase of treatment, and annually thereafter.
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Takayasu arteritis Follow up
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
peripheral vascular ischemia variable high
Many of the complications of Takayasu arteritis represent ischemic symptoms related to the development
of vascular stenoses and occlusions. Differentiating between ischemia resulting from active vasculitis and
ischemia from vascular damage can be difficult. Regular vascular imaging studies can help with follow-
up but should also be obtained in the setting of new ischemic symptoms. Attempts to control vascular
inflammation are needed to try to minimize long-term vascular damage.
hypertension variable high
Hypertension is a common complication, usually due to renal artery or aortic valve stenosis.[8]
osteoporosis secondary to glucocorticoid use variable high
Long-term glucocorticoid therapy increases the risk of osteoporosis, and the greatest amount of bone loss
occurs in the first 6 to 12 months of therapy. Risk is proportional to cumulative dose, so glucocorticoid
dose should be reduced as soon as possible.
diabetes mellitus secondary to glucocorticoid use variable medium
Long-term glucocorticoid therapy can cause the development of diabetes mellitus. A high degree of
vigilance is required.
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia variable medium
Patients require influenza and pneumococcal immunizations annually. Use of prophylactic antibiotic
therapy to prevent  Pneumocystis jirovecii  pneumonia is important, especially when the prednisone dose
is more than 20 mg daily.
aortic aneurysm variable medium
Most often involves the ascending thoracic aorta.
aortic regurgitation variable medium
Aortic valve insufficiency, usually due to aortic root dilation, is found in about 25% of patients.[8]
 Echocardiography may be helpful to evaluate aortic valve function in patients with confirmed proximal
aortic arteritis.[26]
congestive heart failure variable medium
Congestive heart failure occurs in about 25% of patients.[8]
angina variable low
Angina from coronary artery involvement is described in up to 10% of patients.[8]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Takayasu arteritis Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
stroke variable low
Involvement of carotid or vertebral arteries can result in a transient ischemic attack or stroke. Visual
disturbance including blurred vision and amaurosis fugax may be present, but permanent visual loss is
uncommon.[8]
Prognosis
Remission of disease is usually defined as the lack of clinical and laboratory features of disease, with no
evidence of new vascular lesions on follow-up imaging examinations.[2] [8] Most patients achieve disease
remission, although the majority require immunosuppressive therapy in addition to glucocorticoids.[8]
Monophasic disease is described in about 20% of patients.[2] In one series, sustained remission, lasting for
at least 6 months while on <10 mg of prednisone daily, was attained by only 28% of patients, and only 17%
remained in remission after prednisone was discontinued.[8]
Disease relapses occur in >80% of all patients who go into remission.[2] [8] Relapses can occur despite
ongoing immunosuppressive treatment. Relapses manifest as new vascular lesions on imaging studies are
typically associated with elevation of acute phase markers, but this laboratory evidence of active disease can
be lacking.[8] [56]
Mortality and morbidity
Cardiac failure is a common cause of death.[24] Long-term morbidity is related primarily to complications
from vascular ischemia. Symptomatic extremity claudication occurs in about 50% of patients. Upper-
extremity claudication is more common than lower-extremity symptoms. Thoracic aortic aneurysm, aortic
valve involvement, and arteritis of coronary and pulmonary arteries are known complications that are
associated with increased mortality. The 5-year mortality in Takayasu arteritis is estimated to be between
70% and 93%.[57]
Pregnancy
Because Takayasu arteritis is primarily a disease of young women, pregnancy is often a consideration. There
are few data about pregnancy in patients with Takayasu arteritis, but successful pregnancies have been
reported.[8] [58] In one series of patients, the annual incidence of pregnancies fell after the diagnosis of
Takayasu arteritis, and the percentage of miscarriages showed an upward trend.[58] Careful management of
hypertension is necessary during pregnancy.
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Takayasu arteritis Guidelines
Diagnostic guidelines
International
2022 American College of Rheumatology/EULAR classification criteria for
Takayasu arteritis (https://rheumatology.org/clinical-guidance)   [35]
Published by: American College of Rheumatology Last published: 2022
Treatment guidelines
International
2022 ACC/AHA guideline for the diagnosis and management of aortic
disease: a report of the American Heart Association/American College
of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines (https://
professional.heart.org/en)   [26]
Published by: American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American
Heart Association (AHA)
Last published: 2022
Guideline for the management of giant cell arteritis and Takayasu arteritis
(https://rheumatology.org/clinical-guidance)   [3]
Published by: American College of Rheumatology; Vasculitis
Foundation
Last published: 2021
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Takayasu arteritis Online resources
ONLINE RESOURCES
Online resources
1. Vasculitis Foundation (http://www.vasculitisfoundation.org)  (external link)
2. Medline Plus: Takayasu arteritis (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/001250.htm) 
(external link)
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Takayasu arteritis References
Key articles
• Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ. Medium- and large-vessel vasculitis. N Engl J Med. 2003 Jul
10;349(2):160-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12853590?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Kerr GS. Takayasu's arteritis. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 1995 Nov;21(4):1041-58. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8592736?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Maz M, Chung SA, Abril A, et al. 2021 American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation
guideline for the management of giant cell arteritis and Takayasu arteritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2021
Aug;73(8):1349-65.  Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/art.41774)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34235884?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Pugh D, Karabayas M, Basu N, et al. Large-vessel vasculitis. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2022 Jan
6;7(1):93.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9115766)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34992251?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Isselbacher EM, Preventza O, et al. 2022 ACC/AHA guideline for the diagnosis and management
of aortic disease: a report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Dec 13;80(24):e223-393. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36334952?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Grayson PC, Ponte C, Suppiah R, et al. 2022 American College of Rheumatology/EULAR
classification criteria for Takayasu arteritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2022 Dec;81(12):1654-60.  Full
text (https://ard.bmj.com/content/81/12/1654.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36351705?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ. Medium- and large-vessel vasculitis. N Engl J Med. 2003 Jul
10;349(2):160-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12853590?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Kerr GS. Takayasu's arteritis. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 1995 Nov;21(4):1041-58. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8592736?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
3. Maz M, Chung SA, Abril A, et al. 2021 American College of Rheumatology/Vasculitis Foundation
guideline for the management of giant cell arteritis and Takayasu arteritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2021
Aug;73(8):1349-65.  Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/art.41774)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34235884?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Pugh D, Karabayas M, Basu N, et al. Large-vessel vasculitis. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2022 Jan
6;7(1):93.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9115766)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34992251?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon PA, et al. 2012 revised International Chapel Hill Consensus
Conference nomenclature of vasculitides. Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Jan;65(1):1-11.  Full text (http://
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Takayasu arteritis References
REFERENCES
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/art.37715/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23045170?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. Moriwaki R, Noda M, Yajima M, et al. Clinical manifestations of Takayasu arteritis in India and Japan
- new classification of angiographic findings. Angiology. 1997 May;48(5):369-79. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9158381?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Hall S, Barr W, Lie JT, et al. Takayasu arteritis. A study of 32 North American patients. Medicine
(Baltimore). 1985 Mar;64(2):89-99. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2858047?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Maksimowicz-McKinnon K, Clark T, Hoffman GS. Limitations of therapy and a guarded prognosis
in an American cohort of Takayasu arteritis patients. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Mar;56(3):1000-9.  Full
text (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/art.22404/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/17328078?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Numano F, Okawara M, Inomata H, et al. Takayasu's arteritis. Lancet. 2000 Sep 16;356(9234):1023-5.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11041416?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Werfel T, Kuipers JG, Zeidler H, et al. Cutaneous manifestations of Takayasu arteritis. Acta
Derm Venereol. 1996 Nov;76(6):496-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8982426?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Waern AU, Anderson P, Hemmingsson A. Takayasu's arteritis: a hospital-region based study
on occurrence, treatment and prognosis. Angiology. 1983 May;34(5):311-20. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6133485?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Vieira M, Ochtrop MLG, Sztajnbok F, et al. The epidemiology of Takayasu arteritis in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil: a large population-based study. J Clin Rheumatol. 2023 Aug 1;29(5):e100-3. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37068270?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Nasu T. Takayasu's truncoarteritis in Japan. A statistical observation of 76 autopsy cases. Pathol
Microbiol (Basel). 1975;43(2-O):140-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6933?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Rutter M, Bowley J, Lanyon PC, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the incidence
rate of Takayasu arteritis. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2021 Nov 3;60(11):4982-90.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/rheumatology/article/60/11/4982/6263849)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/33944899?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Saruhan-Direskeneli G, Biçakçigil M, Yilmaz V, et al. Interleukin (IL)-12, IL-2, and IL-6 gene
polymorphisms in Takayasu's arteritis from Turkey. Hum Immunol. 2006 Sep;67(9):735-40. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17002904?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Kimura A, Kitamura H, Date Y, et al. Comprehensive analysis of HLA genes in Takayasu arteritis
in Japan. Int J Cardiol. 1996 Aug;54 Suppl:S61-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9119528?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Takayasu arteritis References
17. Sahin N, Aksu K, Kamali S, et al. PTPN22 gene polymorphism in Takayasu's arteritis. Rheumatology
(Oxford). 2008 May;47(5):634-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18375974?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Misra DP, Chaurasia S, Misra R. Increased circulating Th17 cells, serum IL-17A, and IL-23 in
Takayasu arteritis. Autoimmune Dis. 2016;2016:7841718.  Full text (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1155/2016/7841718)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27034824?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Clifford A, Hoffman GS. Recent advances in the medical management of Takayasu arteritis: an
update on use of biologic therapies. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2014 Jan;26(1):7-15. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24225487?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Nakaoka Y, Isobe M, Takei S, et al. Efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in patients with refractory
Takayasu arteritis: results from a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3
trial in Japan (the TAKT study). Ann Rheum Dis. 2018 Mar;77(3):348-54.  Full text (https://
ard.bmj.com/content/77/3/348.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29191819?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Seko Y, Sato O, Takagi A, et al. Restricted usage of T-cell receptor Valpha-Vbeta genes in infiltrating
cells in aortic tissue of patients with Takayasu's arteritis. Circulation. 1996 May 15;93(10):1788-90. 
Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/93/10/1788.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/8635256?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Eichhorn J, Sima D, Thiele B, et al. Anti-endothelial cell antibodies in Takayasu arteritis. Circulation.
1996 Nov 15;94(10):2396-401.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/94/10/2396.full)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8921779?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Yoneda S, Nukada T, Tada K, et al. Subclavian steal in Takayasu's arteritis. A hemodynamic
study by means of ultrasonic Doppler flowmetry. Stroke. 1977 Mar-Apr;8(2):264-8. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15335?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Mwipatayi BP, Jeffery PC, Beningfield SJ, et al. Takayasu arteritis: clinical features and management:
report of 272 cases. ANZ J Surg. 2005 Mar;75(3):110-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15777385?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. American Society for Clinical Pathology. Thirty five things physicians and patients should question.
Choosing Wisely, an initiative of the ABIM Foundation. 2021 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
web.archive.org/web/20230316185857/https://www.choosingwisely.org/societies/american-society-for-
clinical-pathology)
26. Isselbacher EM, Preventza O, et al. 2022 ACC/AHA guideline for the diagnosis and management
of aortic disease: a report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Joint
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2022 Dec 13;80(24):e223-393. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36334952?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Takayasu arteritis References
REFERENCES
27. Treglia GM. Usefulness of whole-body fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
in patients with large-vessel vasculitis: a systematic review. Clin Rheumatol. 2011 Oct;30(10):1265-75.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21833685?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Webb M, Chambers A, Al-Nahhas A, et al. The role of 18F-FDG PET in characterising disease
activity in Takayasu arteritis. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2004 May;31(5):627-34. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14730404?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Kissin EY, Merkel PA. Diagnostic imaging in Takayasu arteritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2004
Jan;16(1):31-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14673386?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Arend WP, Michel BA, Block DA, et al. The American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria for
the classification of Takayasu arteritis. Arthritis Rheum. 1990 Aug;33(8):1129-34.  Full text (http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/art.1780330811/pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/1975175?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Yamada I, Nakagawa T, Himeno Y, et al. Takayasu arteritis: evaluation of the thoracic aorta
with CT angiography. Radiology. 1998 Oct;209(1):103-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9769819?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Aluquin VP, Albano SA, Chan F, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis and follow
up of Takayasu's arteritis in children. Ann Rheum Dis. 2002 Jun;61(6):526-9.  Full text (http://
ard.bmj.com/content/61/6/526.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12006326?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Andrews J, Al-Nahhas A, Pennell DJ, et al. Non-invasive imaging in the diagnosis and
management of Takayasu's arteritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2004 Aug;63(8):995-1000.  Full text (http://
ard.bmj.com/content/63/8/995.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15249328?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Lariviere D, Benali K, Coustet B, et al. Positron emission tomography and computed tomography
angiography for the diagnosis of giant cell arteritis: A real-life prospective study. Medicine (Baltimore).
2016 Jul;95(30):e4146.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5265821)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27472684?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Grayson PC, Ponte C, Suppiah R, et al. 2022 American College of Rheumatology/EULAR
classification criteria for Takayasu arteritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2022 Dec;81(12):1654-60.  Full
text (https://ard.bmj.com/content/81/12/1654.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/36351705?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. Kerr GS, Hallahan CW, Giordano J, et al. Takayasu arteritis. Ann Intern Med. 1994 Jun
1;120(11):919-29. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7909656?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Hoffman GS, Leavitt RY, Kerr GS, et al. Treatment of glucocorticoid-resistant or relapsing
Takayasu arteritis with methotrexate. Arthritis Rheum. 1994 Apr;37(4):578-82. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7908520?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Hellmich B, Agueda A, Monti S, et al. 2018 update of the EULAR recommendations for the
management of large vessel vasculitis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2020 Jan;79(1):19-30.  Full text (https://
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Takayasu arteritis References
ard.bmj.com/content/79/1/19.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31270110?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Shelhamer JH, Volkman DJ, Parrillo JE, et al. Takayasu's arteritis and its therapy. Ann Intern
Med. 1985 Jul;103(1):121-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2860834?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Hoffman GS, Merkel PA, Brasington RD, et al. Anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy in patients
with difficult to treat Takayasu arteritis. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Jul;50(7):2296-304.  Full text
(http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/art.20300/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/15248230?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Molloy ES, Langford CA, Clark CE, et al. Anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy in patients with refractory
Takayasu arteritis: long-term follow-up. Ann Rheum Dis. 2008 Nov;67(11):1567-9. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18677012?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Schmidt J, Kermani TA, Bacani AK, et al. Tumor necrosis factor inhibitors in patients with
Takayasu arteritis: Experience from a referral center with long-term follow-up. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken). 2012 Jul;64(7):1079-83. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22328491?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Koster MJ, Matteson EL, Warrington KJ. Recent advances in the clinical management of giant
cell arteritis and Takayasu arteritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2016 May;28(3):211-7. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26885650?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Rao SA, Mandalam KR, Rao VR, et al. Takayasu arteritis: initial and long-term follow-up in 16
patients after percutaneous transluminal angioplasty of the descending thoracic and abdominal
aorta. Radiology. 1993 Oct;189(1):173-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8103942?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Fields CE, Bower TC, Cooper LT, et al. Takayasu's arteritis: operative results and influence of
disease activity. J Vasc Surg. 2006 Jan;43(1):64-71.  Full text (http://www.jvascsurg.org/article/
S0741-5214(05)01700-3/fulltext)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16414389?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Labarca C, Makol A, Crowson CS, et al. Retrospective comparison of open versus endovascular
procedures for takayasu arteritis. J Rheumatol. 2016 Feb;43(2):427-32. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26669920?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Miyata T, Sato O, Koyama H, et al. Long-term survival after surgical treatment of patients with
Takayasu's arteritis. Circulation. 2003 Sep 23;108(12):1474-80.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/
content/108/12/1474.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12952846?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Cui X, Dai X, Ma L, et al. Efficacy and safety of leflunomide treatment in Takayasu arteritis:
case series from the East China cohort. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2020 Feb;50(1):59-65.  Full
text (https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0049017218307704)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31350057?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Takayasu arteritis References
REFERENCES
49. Regola F, Uzzo M, Toniati P, et al. Novel therapies in Takayasu arteritis. Front Med (Lausanne).
2021;8:814075.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8790042)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35096902?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Watanabe R, Hashimoto M. Perspectives of JAK inhibitors for large vessel vasculitis. Front Immunol.
2022;13:881705.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9005632)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35432355?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Bursi R, Cafaro G, Perricone C, et al. Contribution of Janus-kinase/signal transduction activator of
transcription pathway in the pathogenesis of vasculitis: a possible treatment target in the upcoming
future. Front Pharmacol. 2021;12:635663.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC8039124)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33854436?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. ClinicalTrails.gov. Efficiency of methotrexate and tofacitinib in mild and moderate patients. Jun 2020
[internet publication].  Full text (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04299971)
53. ClinicalTrails.gov. A study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of upadacitinib in participants
with Takayasu arteritis (TAK) (SELECT-TAK). May 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04161898)
54. Langford CA, Cuthbertson D, Ytterberg SR, et al; Vasculitis Clinical Research Consortium. A
randomized, double-blind trial of abatacept (CTLA-4Ig) for the treatment of Takayasu arteritis. Arthritis
Rheumatol. 2017 Apr;69(4):846-53. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28133931?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. Tian X, Li M, Jiang N, et al. Comparative efficacy of secukinumab versus tumor necrosis factor
inhibitors for the treatment of Takayasu arteritis. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2023 Aug;75(8):1415-23. 
Full text (https://acrjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/art.42496)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36916777?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Maksimowicz-McKinnon K, Hoffman GS. Takayasu arteritis: what is the long-term prognosis? Rheum
Dis Clin North Am. 2007 Nov;33(4):777-86. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18037116?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Phillip R, Luqmani R. Mortality in systemic vasculitis: a systematic review. Clin Exp Rheumatol.
2008 Sep-Oct;26(5 Suppl 51):S94-104. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19026150?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58. Vanoli M, Daina E, Salvarani C, et al; Itaka Study Group. Takayasu's arteritis: a study of 104
Italian patients. Arthritis Rheum. 2005 Feb 15;53(1):100-7.  Full text (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/art.20922/full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15696576?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 45 ===
Takayasu arteritis Images
Images
Figure 1: Photomicrograph of the aorta from a patient with Takayasu arteritis demonstrates marked thickening
of the intimal layer and inflammatory infiltrates in the media and laminar necrosis
Used with permission from the collection of Dylan Miller, MD, Mayo Clinic
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
45
=== Page 46 ===
Takayasu arteritis Images
IMAGES
Figure 2: Magnetic resonance angiogram of the aortic arch and major vessels showing occlusion of bilateral
subclavian arteries; left common carotid artery has small diameter; proximal vertebral arteries are not
identified
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
46 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 47 ===
Takayasu arteritis Images
Figure 3: Computed tomography angiogram, with 3D reconstruction of the aortic arch and major vessels,
showing proximal occlusion of the left subclavian artery and patent left vertebral artery distal to the occlusion
(left vertebral steal syndrome)
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
47
=== Page 48 ===
Takayasu arteritis Images
IMAGES
Figure 4: Computed tomography angiogram, with 3D reconstruction of the aortic arch and major vessels,
showing narrowing of the left common carotid artery and left subclavian artery
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
48 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 49 ===
Takayasu arteritis Images
Figure 5: Computed tomography angiogram with 3D reconstruction showing bilateral renal artery stenosis
From the collection of Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
49
=== Page 50 ===
Takayasu arteritis Images
IMAGES
Figure 6: The final 2022 American College of Rheumatology/EULAR Classification Criteria for Takayasu
arteritis
Grayson et al. Arthritis Rheumatol 2022;74(12):1872-80; used with permission
50 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 51 ===
Takayasu arteritis Disclaimer
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
51
=== Page 52 ===
Takayasu arteritis Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
52 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jan 10, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 53 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Kenneth J. Warrington, MD
Professor of Medicine
Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN
DISCLOSURES: KJW declares that he has received clinical trial support from Eli Lilly, BMS, and Kiniksa.
He has received consulting fees and honoraria from Amgen and Sanofi. KJW is an author of a number of
references cited in this topic.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Kenneth J. Warrington would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Steven R. Ytterberg and Dr Eric L.
Matteson, previous contributors to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: SRY declares that he was a sub-awardee of a grant from the US Food and Drug
Administration for a pilot study of abatacept, a treatment for Takayasu arteritis. SRY is also a member of the
steering committee at the Vasculitis Clinical Research Committee. ELM declares that he has no competing
interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Loic P. Guillevin, MD
Internal Medicine
Hopital Cochin-Paris University, St-Jacques, Paris, France
DISCLOSURES: LPG declares that he has no competing interests.
Gene G. Hunder, MD
Department of Medicine
Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
DISCLOSURES: GGH is an author of a reference cited in this topic. GGH declares that he has no other
competing interests.
