# Tetralogy of Fallot

=== Page 1 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Jul 12, 2024
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Etiology  4
Pathophysiology  4
Classification  6
Case history  6
Diagnosis  7
Approach  7
History and exam  9
Risk factors  9
Tests  11
Differentials  13
Criteria  14
Screening  14
Management  15
Approach  15
Treatment algorithm overview  17
Treatment algorithm  18
Emerging  24
Secondary prevention  24
Patient discussions  24
Follow up  25
Monitoring  25
Complications  26
Prognosis  27
Guidelines  29
Diagnostic guidelines  29
Treatment guidelines  29
References  31
Images  38
Disclaimer  39
=== Page 3 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Overview
Summary
Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is a ventricular septal defect with overriding aorta and right ventricular (RV) outflow
tract obstruction and resulting RV hypertrophy. The common embryologic cause for this constellation of
findings is anterior and cephalad deviation of the muscular outlet of the ventricular septum.
Usually presents in the neonatal period with a murmur, cyanosis, or both.
Diagnosed by echocardiography.
Treatment is by surgical repair. This usually consists of complete intracardiac repair typically during the
neonatal or infant period. Occasionally, an aortopulmonary shunt is used palliatively before complete repair.
The most common long-term complications of complete repair are progressive pulmonary regurgitation and
RV failure, atrial arrhythmias, and ventricular arrhythmias.
Definition
TOF is a congenital cardiac malformation. The key morphologic abnormality is anterior and cephalad
deviation of the muscular outlet of the ventricular septum, which causes the 4 classic findings: (1) a
malalignment ventricular septal defect (VSD), (2) aorta overriding the VSD, (3) right ventricular outflow tract
obstruction, (4) secondary concentric right ventricular hypertrophy.
This was classically described in 1888 by Dr. Etienne-Louis Arthur Fallot, a pathologist, who coined the
term "la maladie bleue" (blue-baby syndrome). The cyanosis associated with this condition is due to right-
to-left shunting of deoxygenated blood at the level of the VSD. Historically, children with TOF presented
with cyanosis that was progressive and life-limiting; untreated children with TOF would typically squat down,
which would lead to increased pulmonary blood flow.[1]
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
Congenital heart defects are relatively common overall. During the early 1980s, an epidemiologic study
designed to estimate the prevalence of congenital heart disease (CHD) in the northeastern US showed the
prevalence rate of CHD to be 3.7 per 1000 live births. There was a slight, but not statistically significant, male
predominance and no ethnic difference.[2]
While it has been suggested that the incidence of CHD may be increasing over time, one meta-analysis of
the literature suggests that this is largely due to an increasing ability to detect very minor cardiac lesions
(e.g., trivial ventricular septal defects that will not need intervention).[3] This report suggests that the overall
incidence of severe forms of CHD has been stable over time at approximately 2.5/1000 to 3/1000 with
moderate forms representing another 3/1000 live births. Of the severe forms of CHD, TOF is the most
common cyanotic defect. It represents approximately 4% to 9% of all CHD and 30% of all cyanotic lesions.[2]
[4] Globally, TOF is estimated to occur in 3 cases per 10,000 live births.[4] In the US, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention estimates that annually, 1 in 2518 babies are born with TOF.[5]
Etiology
Little is known about the exact etiology of TOF. There is most likely interplay between genetic and
environmental factors, but this has not been fully defined. One study of pregnant women with a first-degree
relative with congenital heart disease (CHD) found 178 per 6640 (2.7%) pregnancies with CHD.[6]
There is a well-accepted association between certain genetic defects and CHD. Patients with trisomy
21, 18, or 13 have a higher incidence of TOF than infants without trisomy.[7] A retrospective analysis in
patients with apparently nonsyndromic TOF found 10 out of 21 patients to have deletions of chromosome
22q11 (DiGeorge and associated syndromes), suggesting a region on this chromosome may harbor a TOF
susceptibility gene.[8] In an earlier study comparing patients who had TOF with and without chromosome
22q11 deletion, every patient with TOF and 22q11 deletion was found to have an additional conotruncal
anomaly.[9] Alagille syndrome, a syndrome with cardiovascular phenotypes ranging from mild pulmonic
stenosis to TOF with severe pulmonary obstruction, has been found to be due to mutations in the Jagged1
gene.[10] Additionally, mutations in Jagged1 have been associated with nonsyndromic forms of TOF.[11] A
prospective study looking for mutations in NKX2.5 in patients with known TOF found approximately 4% of
patients with nonsyndromic TOF to have a mutation in NKX2.5.[12]
Increasing evidence suggests environmental factors may play a significant role in some cases of CHD.[13]
Maternal diabetes, maternal phenylketonuria, and maternal ingestion of retinoic acids or trimethadione have
all been associated with an increased risk of CHD.[14] [15] [16] 
Pathophysiology
In TOF, the pathophysiology and management are dictated by 3 specific anatomic factors:
1. Degree of right ventricular outflow tract obstruction
• Typically occurs at multiple levels, including below the pulmonary valve (subvalvular or infundibular
stenosis), at the level of the valve (valvular pulmonary stenosis), and above the valve (supravalvular
stenosis). The degree of pulmonary obstruction determines whether the infant is cyanotic or acyanotic
by affecting the amount of blood that shunts right to left at the ventricular septal defect (VSD).
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Theory
• TOF with mild pulmonary obstruction is typically not a cyanotic lesion. There is no significant restriction
to the flow of blood into the pulmonary arteries and therefore the infant is well saturated.
• TOF and significant pulmonary obstruction result in a cyanotic infant. This is because blood in the
right ventricle has a higher resistance to overcome in order to enter the pulmonary circulation. Blood is
shunted from the right ventricle to the aorta through the VSD and into the systemic circulation without
being oxygenated in the pulmonary circulation.
2. Pulmonary artery anatomy
• Pulmonary artery anatomy can dramatically affect the physiology.
• Pulmonary atresia with VSD (TOF with pulmonary atresia) and absent pulmonary valve syndrome
(TOF with absent pulmonary valve) are very different physiologically and are considered different
disease processes from TOF. For that reason, they are not discussed here.
3. Nonrestrictive, malalignment VSD
• Anterior malalignment VSD in TOF is nearly always nonrestrictive. With a large, nonrestrictive VSD,
the pressure in the right ventricle and left ventricle equalizes. In this case, the VSD does not determine
the degree of shunting. The degree of shunting in TOF is therefore due to the relative resistance to
flow of the pulmonary versus systemic circulations.
• Additional VSDs may be present and should be looked for, as these may complicate the postoperative
course.
Hypercyanotic spells, or tet spells, are episodes of severe cyanosis associated with hyperpnea. They
result from an increase in right ventricular outflow tract obstruction causing a decrease in the pulmonary
blood flow and an increase in right-to-left shunting across the VSD. The exact etiology of hypercyanotic
spells is unclear, but they are thought to be initiated by increases in the right ventricular infundibular
contractility. Hypercyanotic spells may be self-limited; however, if sustained, they can result in brain ischemia
or death.[17]
Anatomy and pathophysiology of tetralogy of Fallot (TOF): normal heart structure (a) promotes unidirectional
flow of deoxygenated blood (blue) into the lungs and oxygenated blood (red) into the aorta; in TOF (b)
pulmonary stenosis and narrowing of the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) impedes the flow of deoxygenated
blood into the lungs, and both the ventricular septal defect (VSD) and overriding aorta (*) promote the flow
of deoxygenated blood into the systemic circulation, to produce cyanosis (sometimes referred to as “blue
baby” syndrome), right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) is also present; (c) a Doppler echocardiogram shows
mixing of deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle (RV) and oxygenated blood from the left ventricle (LV)
as blood is pumped out the over-riding aorta (Ao) in a patient with TOF (RA=right atrium, LA=left atrium)
Multimedia Library of Congenital Heart Disease, Children’s Hospital,
Boston, MA, editor Robert Geggel, MD; used with permission
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Theory
THEORY
Classification
Variants of TOF
There is no standard classification for TOF, but many experts would use the following classification:
1. Cyanotic TOF (also known as blue tet): infants with TOF and moderate to severe pulmonary
obstruction are cyanotic at birth due to right-to-left shunting of deoxygenated blood from the right
ventricle across the VSD to the body.
2. Acyanotic TOF (also known as pink tet): infants with TOF and mild pulmonary obstruction are
commonly acyanotic because there is little or no right-to-left shunting of blood at the ventricular level.
These patients still undergo complete intracardiac repair.
3. Pulmonary atresia/VSD: sometimes referred to as TOF with pulmonary atresia and is anatomically and
physiologically very different. It is often associated with malformation of the central pulmonary arteries.
4. Absent pulmonary valve syndrome: sometimes referred to as TOF with absent pulmonary valve. It is
often associated with tracheobronchial compression and malformation.
Case history
Case history #1
A 1-day-old infant in the general care nursery born at full term by uncomplicated spontaneous vaginal
delivery is noted to have cyanosis of the oral mucosa. The baby otherwise appears comfortable. On
exam, respiratory rate is 40 and pulse oximetry is 80%. A right ventricular lift is palpated, S1 is normal, S2
is single, and a harsh 3/6 systolic ejection murmur is heard at the left upper sternal border.
Case history #2
A 1-day-old infant in the general care nursery born at full term by uncomplicated spontaneous vaginal
delivery is noted to have a murmur on exam. The baby otherwise appears well. On exam, respiratory rate
is 40 and pulse oximetry is 96%. Precordium is normoactive. With auscultation, S1 is normal, S2 is single,
and a 2/6 systolic ejection murmur is heard at the left upper sternal border.
Other presentations
Cyanosis occurs if severe right ventricular outflow tract obstruction forces blood returning to the right
side of the heart to be shunted right to left across the ventricular septal defect and out to the systemic
circulation, bypassing the lungs. Hypercyanotic (tet) spells may present as episodic, increasing cyanosis
in a baby with TOF. The baby is typically crying and breathing deeply and rapidly, but may not be
in significant respiratory distress. The typical murmur of TOF may disappear during the spell. This
presentation is potentially life-threatening and requires rapid intervention. Alternatively, a baby may be
severely cyanotic at birth.
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Diagnosis
Approach
Patients typically present with cyanosis and/or a murmur. Echocardiography is the definitive investigation
for diagnosis of TOF and should be ordered in any newborn with a suspected diagnosis of congenital heart
disease.
History
Certain genetic syndromes are associated with an increased incidence of TOF, such as DiGeorge and
Down syndromes. There may be a history of abnormality on fetal echocardiogram that suggests cardiac
pathology.
A typical infant presents in the newborn nursery with a murmur. Cyanosis is usually noted. The degree of
cyanosis may vary and can be subtle, and some clinicians advocate routine screening of all neonates with
pulse oximetry.[18]
Some infants may not present at birth but rather may present later with increasing cyanosis, murmur, or
hypercyanotic (tet) spells. Hypercyanotic spells may present as episodic, increasing cyanosis in a baby
with TOF. The baby is typically crying and breathing deeply and rapidly, but may not be in significant
respiratory distress. The typical murmur of TOF may disappear during the spell. This presentation is
potentially life-threatening and requires rapid intervention.
TOF with severe pulmonary obstruction is a more severe presentation and may present in a newborn who
appears severely cyanotic at birth. Infants with severe pulmonary obstruction or a hypercyanotic spell may
present with severe cyanosis and acidosis due to tissue hypoxia.
Physical examination
Can vary significantly depending on the degree of pulmonary obstruction. The infant with mild obstruction
is typically comfortable, and cyanosis may be difficult to discover on physical exam. With moderate
obstruction the cyanosis is likely to be apparent on exam and the infant is typically comfortable. With
severe obstruction the baby may have significant tachypnea and cyanosis.
The cardiac exam typically finds an increased right ventricular (parasternal) impulse. S1 is normal and
S2 is single. There is typically a 3/6 harsh systolic ejection murmur, heard best at the left sternal border.
The murmur on exam represents blood flow across the pulmonary outflow and not the ventricular septal
defect. The intensity of the murmur depends on the degree of pulmonary stenosis and decreases with
severe stenosis.
Investigations
Transthoracic 2-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography is the preferred technique for defining the
anatomic diagnosis. In the vast majority of cases no further testing is needed preoperatively. Sedation
may be judiciously used if the child is not cooperative with the exam.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Anatomy and pathophysiology of tetralogy of Fallot (TOF): normal heart structure (a) promotes unidirectional
flow of deoxygenated blood (blue) into the lungs and oxygenated blood (red) into the aorta; in TOF (b)
pulmonary stenosis and narrowing of the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) impedes the flow of deoxygenated
blood into the lungs, and both the ventricular septal defect (VSD) and overriding aorta (*) promote the flow
of deoxygenated blood into the systemic circulation, to produce cyanosis (sometimes referred to as “blue
baby” syndrome), right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) is also present; (c) a Doppler echocardiogram shows
mixing of deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle (RV) and oxygenated blood from the left ventricle (LV)
as blood is pumped out the over-riding aorta (Ao) in a patient with TOF (RA=right atrium, LA=left atrium)
Multimedia Library of Congenital Heart Disease, Children’s Hospital,
Boston, MA, editor Robert Geggel, MD; used with permission
Preductal and postductal (right arm and either leg) pulse oximetry should be ordered if there is any
suspicion of a congenital cardiac malformation.[19] A hyperoxygenation test can be used to determine
whether hypoxemia is from a pulmonary or a cardiac lesion.
ECG will often show evidence of right ventricular hypertrophy and may show right axis deviation beyond
normal limits for age.
ECG in tetralogy of Fallot showing right ventricular hypertrophy
From the collection of Dr Jeffrey Gossett; used with permission
A chest x-ray is classically described as a boot-shaped heart, but most patients do not have this finding.
The presence of a right aortic arch may be noted in a subset of patients, particularly those with 22q11
deletion.[9]
Cardiac catheterization is usually unnecessary in diagnosing TOF and may induce hypercyanotic
spells.[17] If there is significant concern for coronary artery anomalies that cannot be defined
echocardiographically, then advanced imaging modalities including cardiac computed tomography
angiography and magnetic resonance imaging are often used.[20] Anomalies in the distribution or course
of the coronary arteries may be present in approximately one third of patients with TOF.[21]
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Diagnosis
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
hypercyanotic episodes (common)
• Hypercyanotic (tet) spells may present as episodic, increasing cyanosis in a baby with TOF.
• The baby is typically crying and breathing deeply and rapidly, but may not be in significant respiratory
distress.
• The typical murmur of TOF may disappear during the spell.
• This presentation is potentially life-threatening and requires rapid intervention
• Can occur in both cyanotic and acyanotic infants with TOF.
harsh systolic ejection murmur (common)
• Loudest at the left sternal border represents the blood flow across the narrowed right ventricular
outflow tract.
cyanosis (common)
• Usually noted; however, the degree of cyanosis may vary and can be subtle. TOF with severe
pulmonary obstruction is a more severe presentation and may present in a newborn who appears
severely cyanotic at birth.
tachypnea (common)
• May have significant tachypnea with severe pulmonary obstruction.
Other diagnostic factors
shock (uncommon)
• Infants with severe pulmonary obstruction or a hypercyanotic spell may present with severe cyanosis
and acidosis due to tissue hypoxia.
Risk factors
Weak
trisomy 21, 18, or 13
• There is a well-accepted association between certain genetic defects and congenital heart disease.
Patients with trisomy 21, 18, or 13 have a higher incidence of TOF than infants without trisomy.[7]
chromosome 22q11 deletions (DiGeorge syndrome)
• A retrospective analysis in patients with apparently nonsyndromic TOF found 10 out of 21 patients to
have deletions of chromosome 22q11 (DiGeorge and associated syndromes), suggesting a region on
this chromosome may harbor a TOF susceptibility gene.[8]
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Jagged1 gene mutations (Alagille syndrome)
• Alagille syndrome, a syndrome with cardiovascular phenotypes ranging from mild pulmonic stenosis
to TOF with severe pulmonary obstruction, has been found to be due to mutations in the Jagged1
gene.[10] Additionally, mutations in Jagged1 have been associated with nonsyndromic forms of
TOF.[11]
mutation in NKX2.5 gene
• A prospective study looking for mutations in NKX2.5 in patients with known TOF found approximately
4% of patients with nonsyndromic TOF to have a mutation in NKX2.5.[12]
environmental factors
• Increasing evidence suggests environmental factors, such as maternal diabetes and phenylketonuria
and maternal ingestion of retinoic acids and trimethadione, may play a significant causative role in
certain cases of congenital heart disease.[14] [15] [16]
family history of congenital heart disease
• Believed to contribute to the recurrence of congenital heart disease in a family, but it cannot be clearly
explained by mendelian genetics or complete penetrance.[6]
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Diagnosis
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
pulse oximetry
• Preductal and postductal (right arm and either leg) pulse oximetry
should be ordered if there is any suspicion of a congenital cardiac
malformation.[19]
• May be normal in TOF with mild pulmonary stenosis. However,
in TOF with moderate to severe pulmonary stenosis, the baby is
hypoxemic.
low oxygen saturation
echocardiogram
• Should be ordered in any newborn with a suspected diagnosis
of congenital heart disease. Echocardiography is the definitive
investigation for diagnosis of TOF.
infundibular pulmonic
stenosis, overriding
aorta, nonrestrictive
ventricular septal
defect, concentric right
ventricular hypertrophy
ECG
• Right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) may be difficult to interpret in a
neonate. 
ECG in tetralogy of Fallot showing right ventricular hypertrophy
From the collection of Dr Jeffrey Gossett; used with permission
• In an older child RVH is more likely to be seen.
RVH with a rightward axis,
R in V1 and S in V6 above
age-appropriate normals
CXR
• Normal cardiac silhouette does not rule out cyanotic heart disease.
boot-shaped heart
hyperoxygenation test
• Used to determine whether hypoxemia is from a pulmonary or a
cardiac lesion.
• PaO2 on room air should be checked, 100% FiO2 given for at least
10 minutes, and then PaO2 rechecked. If the PaO2 increases by >25
mmHg and to >100 mmHg, the hypoxemia is likely to be caused by a
pulmonary problem.
• In acyanotic patients this test may yield false-negative results.
no significant increase in
PaO2
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Other tests to consider
Test Result
cardiac CT angiography or MRI
• Not routinely needed for evaluation in infants. Can be considered
if definition of the coronary artery anatomy is not possible by
echocardiography.[20]
full definition of coronary
anatomy
cardiac catheterization
• Not routinely done for diagnostic evaluation of TOF because
stimulation of the infundibular muscle may precipitate hypercyanotic
spells.
• Occasionally intervention into the right ventricular outflow tract
(RVOT) may be undertaken prior to complete repair with options
including RVOT ballooning or stenting.[22]
pulmonary stenosis
and ventricular septal
defects may be seen on
angiogram; provides
hemodynamic data
such as systemic right
ventricular pressure and
right-to-left shunt
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Diagnosis
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Other cyanotic congenital
cardiac abnormalities
• Includes single ventricle
lesions such as hypoplastic
left heart syndrome or
tricuspid atresia. Other
possibilities include D-
transposition, pulmonary
atresia, anomalous
pulmonary venous
connection, truncus
arteriosus, or Ebstein
anomaly.
• These may all be difficult
to differentiate clinically
from a cyanotic newborn
with TOF. Most are not
specifically associated with
other syndromes, although
this can vary.
• No change in PaO2 with
hyperoxia test.
• Echocardiogram can define
anatomy to classify cyanotic
heart disease.
• In some cases, a cardiac
catheterization may be
needed to further define
anatomy and physiology.
Pulmonary stenosis • Usually presents in an
asymptomatic patient with a
systolic ejection murmur on
exam. Difficult to differentiate
clinically from TOF.[23]
• Echocardiogram will show
presence or absence of
typical anatomy of TOF with
pulmonary obstruction to
differentiate from pulmonary
stenosis alone.
Ventricular septal defect
(VSD)
• At birth, an infant with simple
VSD is fully saturated with
regurgitant murmur on exam.
• Intensity of murmur depends
on size of VSD and flow
across the VSD. A small
VSD has a louder murmur
because the gradient
between the right and left
ventricles is higher. A large
VSD has a soft murmur
because pressures are
equalized between the right
and left ventricles.
• As pulmonary vascular
resistance drops, more
blood shunts from left to
right across the VSD and
may result in pulmonary
overcirculation and heart
failure. This is uncommon
with TOF, as the pulmonary
obstruction prevents
overcirculation.
• Echocardiogram will show
presence or absence of
right-sided obstructive lesion
to determine whether this is
VSD alone or TOF.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Double outlet right
ventricle with normally
related great vessels and
pulmonary stenosis
• Cannot be differentiated from
TOF on physical exam alone.
• Echocardiogram will show
presence or absence of
subaortic conus and degree
of aorta override of the VSD
to differentiate TOF from
double outlet right ventricle.
Primary pulmonary
disease
• On exam, infant may be
tachypneic and desaturated,
potentially requiring
mechanical ventilation.
• Cardiovascular exam is
usually normal.
• Hyperoxygenation test
should show increase in
PaO2 with administration of
100% FiO2.
• CXR will show normal
cardiac silhouette with
increased lung markings.
• Echocardiogram will show
normal intracardiac anatomy.
Criteria
Echocardiogram findings of TOF
Anterior and cephalad deviation of the muscular outlet of the ventricular septum resulting in:
• Malalignment ventricular septal defect
• Overriding of the aorta
• Multilevel right ventricular outflow tract obstruction
• Right ventricular hypertrophy.
Screening
There is an increase in the routine use of neonatal pulse-oximetry of all neonates for cyanotic heart disease.
This has the potential to identify mildly cyanotic infants and should prompt further investigation of the
neonate.[24] All children with certain syndromes such as trisomy 21 should be screened for congenital heart
disease (CHD). A screening fetal echocardiogram may be indicated in a pregnant mother who has had other
children with CHD or has CHD herself.
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Management
Approach
The definitive treatment for TOF is complete surgical repair. All preoperative patients with TOF need careful
follow-up with their primary physician and a pediatric cardiologist. Attention to their weight gain is mandatory.
Progression of cyanosis should be noted. Parents should be counseled to alert their physicians should they
notice the onset of hypercyanotic spells, as these would be an indication for urgent surgical intervention.
Management of hypercyanotic (tet) spells
An infant with TOF and hypercyanotic spells is a medical emergency because a prolonged hypercyanotic
spell can result in brain ischemia and death.[17]
Management of a hypercyanotic spell consists of calming the child and maneuvers to increase the
amount of blood exiting the right ventricle to the pulmonary vasculature instead of to the aorta. Often the
best place for the infant is in the parent's arms. Initially, the infant should be positioned with the knees to
the chest, as this will increase venous return to the heart (preload) and systemic afterload.
Oxygen should be given, but care should be taken not to increase the infant's stimulation. If the infant is
still profoundly cyanotic, acidosis will result.
If these measures are not successful, medical therapy includes:
• Adjunctive supportive measures such as volume repletion, reversal of acidosis, or morphine
• Beta-blockers to relax the contracted infundibulum and to allow more time for right ventricular filling,
improving pulmonary blood flow
• Phenylephrine as a final medical option to increase systemic venous resistance and force more
blood to the lungs.
Neonates with severely limited pulmonary blood flow causing profound cyanosis may benefit from
prostaglandins (e.g., alprostadil) to maintain the patency of the ductus arteriosus. This provides an
alternative source of pulmonary blood flow while the infant awaits urgent intervention.
If all medical therapies fail to resolve a spell and the neonate or infant remains severely cyanotic, urgent
intervention will be needed. Options include catheter-based right ventricular outflow tract ballooning or
stenting, Blalock-Taussig shunt placement (a small GORE-TEX tube placed from a systemic artery to the
pulmonary arteries to increase pulmonary blood flow), stenting of a patent ductus arteriosus, immediate
complete repair, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.[22] [27] [28]
Propranolol has been used in the past in the outpatient setting of an infant with spells to delay surgery.
An infant with a single spell is considered an indication for urgent surgical repair, but propranolol may be
used until surgery can be arranged.[29]
Surgical management
Over the last 10 to 15 years, there has been a trend toward neonatal repair of both cyanotic and acyanotic
infants with TOF, but this is often determined by their pulmonary anatomy.[29]
In acyanotic patients without spells, repair is usually undertaken in the first year of life and has a very low
morbidity and mortality.[28] [30]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Management
MANAGEMENT
Patients with TOF with severe pulmonary stenosis may undergo complete neonatal repair at some
institutions or alternatively may undergo a Blalock-Taussig shunt or stenting of a patent ductus arteriosus
in the newborn period before complete repair.[27] [28]
Excellent results with complete repair in the neonatal period have been reported, with one cohort
reporting a 5-year survival rate of 93% in patients with TOF who underwent complete repair as a
neonate.[29][31]
Patients who undergo repair in childhood should be counseled about the possible need for future surgical
or transcatheter interventions. In particular, if relief of pulmonary obstruction requires a transannular
patch, there is likely to be a significant amount of postoperative pulmonary regurgitation. There is
an increasing awareness of the need to monitor patients for progressive dilation of the right ventricle
secondary to longstanding pulmonary regurgitation, and the need for pulmonary valve replacement in
this setting. Typically, magnetic resonance imaging measurements are used to quantify the pulmonary
regurgitation and right ventricular size. One group has suggested that valve replacement before the right
ventricular diastolic volume reaches 160 mL/m² allows for normalization of right ventricular volumes.[32]
Another group found that no patient with a right ventricular volume >170 mL/m² had normalization of their
right ventricular volumes after valve replacement.[33] While there is no consensus on the exact criteria for
the timing of replacement of the pulmonary valve, one review suggests using the following criteria:[34]
• Repaired TOF or similar physiology with moderate or severe pulmonary regurgitation (regurgitation
fraction ≥25% measured by cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging) and 2 or more of the
following criteria:
• Right ventricular end-diastolic volume index ≥160 mL/m² (Z score >5)
• Right ventricular end-systolic volume index ≥70 mL/m²
• Left ventricular end-diastolic volume index ≤65 mL/m²
• Right ventricular ejection fraction ≤45%
• Right ventricular outflow tract aneurysm
• Clinical criteria: exercise intolerance, symptoms and signs of heart failure, cardiac
medications, syncope, or sustained ventricular tachycardia.
• Other hemodynamically significant lesions such as moderate or severe tricuspid regurgitation,
residual atrial or ventricular septal defects, and severe aortic regurgitation may trigger referral for
surgery in patients with moderate or severe pulmonary regurgitation. In the absence of the 6 criteria
above, pulmonary valve replacement should be considered on a case-by-case basis.
• Due to a higher risk of adverse clinical outcomes in patients who underwent TOF repair at age ≥3
years, pulmonary valve replacement may be indicated sooner and in the presence of less severe
right ventricular dilation and dysfunction.
Infective endocarditis prophylaxis
This is recommended preoperatively and should be used for 6 months after repair. Those patients
who have residual defects at the site or adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or prosthetic device
should continue to receive lifelong infective endocarditis prophylaxis whenever undergoing an invasive
procedure (e.g., dental procedures, or procedures on the respiratory tract or infected skin, skin structures,
or musculoskeletal tissue).[35] European guidelines recommend advanced imaging modalities including
echocardiography, computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and particularly, PET/
CT imaging for diagnosing infective endocarditis in patients with Tetralogy of Fallot, due to their increased
susceptibility to endocarditis postintervention.[36]
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Management
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute ( summary )
hypercyanotic spells
1st maneuvers to increase systemic venous
return
adjunct supportive care
2nd beta-blocker
adjunct supportive care
3rd phenylephrine
adjunct supportive care
neonate with profound cyanosis and
severely limited pulmonary blood
flow
1st alprostadil
adjunct supportive care
neonate or infant with nonremitting
severe cyanosis
1st surgical shunt, transcatheter stent/
balloon, or immediate complete repair
adjunct extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO)
Ongoing ( summary )
all patients
1st complete surgical repair
plus monitoring with possible pulmonary valve
replacement
adjunct infective endocarditis prophylaxis
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute
hypercyanotic spells
1st maneuvers to increase systemic venous
return
» Infant should be kept calm and maneuvers
tried to increase the amount of blood exiting the
right ventricle through the pulmonary vasculature
instead of to the aorta.
» Infant should be held in the parent's arms and
positioned with the knees to the chest.
adjunct supportive care
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Supportive medical therapy may include
volume/blood administration as needed,
intravenous morphine to calm the child as
needed, and bicarbonate to reverse acidosis
as needed. Oxygen should be given, but care
should be taken not to increase the infant's
stimulation.
2nd beta-blocker
Primary options
» esmolol: 100-500 micrograms/kg
intravenous bolus initially, followed by 50-500
micrograms/kg/min infusion
Bolus should be readministered before
maintenance dose is increased.
OR
» propranolol hydrochloride: 0.15 to 0.25 mg/
kg intravenous bolus initially, may repeat in
15 min; 2-8 mg/kg/day orally given in divided
doses every 6 hours
» Thought to help resolve hypercyanotic spells,
but the mechanism of action is not completely
clear. It is believed that it helps to decrease the
infundibular obstruction by decreasing the heart
rate, prolonging diastolic filling, and decreasing
contractility.[17]
» May be initiated in patients with TOF with
pulmonary stenosis if maneuvers such as knee-
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Management
Acute
to-chest positioning or fluid bolus have not
resolved the hypercyanotic spell.
» Propranolol has been used in the past in
the outpatient setting of an infant with spells
to delay surgery. An infant with a single spell
is considered an indication for urgent surgical
repair, but propranolol may be used until surgery
can be arranged.[29]
adjunct supportive care
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Supportive medical therapy may include
volume/blood administration as needed,
intravenous morphine to calm the child as
needed, and bicarbonate to reverse acidosis
as needed. Oxygen should be given, but care
should be taken not to increase the infant's
stimulation.
3rd phenylephrine
Primary options
» phenylephrine injection: 5-20 micrograms/
kg intravenous bolus, followed by 0.1 to 0.5
micrograms/kg/min infusion
» Used to increase systemic venous resistance
by direct simulation of peripheral alpha-
adrenergic receptors.
» The goal is to increase the systemic vascular
resistance above the resistance of the
pulmonary outflow tract so that blood in the
right ventricle preferentially flows through the
pulmonary circulation, rather than across the
ventricular septal defect and into the systemic
circulation.
» Used in the intensive care unit setting as
the last medical option for management
of hypercyanotic spells. It is initiated when
positioning and beta-blocker agents have not
increased pulmonary blood flow.
adjunct supportive care
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Supportive medical therapy may include
volume/blood administration as needed,
intravenous morphine to calm the child as
needed, and bicarbonate to reverse acidosis
as needed. Oxygen should be given, but care
should be taken not to increase the infant's
stimulation.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
neonate with profound cyanosis and
severely limited pulmonary blood
flow
1st alprostadil
Primary options
» alprostadil: 0.02 to 0.1 micrograms/kg/min
intravenously
» May benefit from alprostadil (prostaglandin
E1) to maintain the patency of the ductus
arteriosus. This provides an alternative source
of pulmonary blood flow while the infant awaits
urgent intervention.
» A potential adverse effect is apnea, and
mechanical ventilation may be required. Monitor
for apnea.
adjunct supportive care
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Supportive medical therapy may include
volume/blood administration as needed,
intravenous morphine to calm the child as
needed, and bicarbonate to reverse acidosis
as needed. Oxygen should be given, but care
should be taken not to increase the infant's
stimulation.
neonate or infant with nonremitting
severe cyanosis
1st surgical shunt, transcatheter stent/
balloon, or immediate complete repair
» For neonates or infants with TOF and
severe pulmonary obstruction in whom the
pulmonary blood flow is significantly restricted,
an alternative source of pulmonary blood flow
may be necessary.
» If all medical therapies fail to resolve a spell
and the patient remains severely cyanotic,
urgent intervention will be needed.
» Options include catheter-based right
ventricular outflow tract ballooning or stenting,
stenting of a patent ductus arteriosus, Blalock-
Taussig shunt placement (a small GORE-
TEX tube placed from a systemic artery to the
pulmonary arteries to increase pulmonary blood
flow), or immediate complete repair.[22] [27] [28]
adjunct extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO)
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Management
Acute
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
» Emergent ECMO may be initiated to
reverse cyanosis and acidosis before surgical
intervention.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Management
MANAGEMENT
Ongoing
all patients
1st complete surgical repair
» Specific treatment guidelines for surgical
management of TOF do not exist, largely due to
the complexity of the anatomic diversity among
patients.
» The anatomic variations in TOF, as well as its
association with other cardiovascular anomalies,
greatly influence the physiologic consequences.
» Additionally, surgical technique varies by
surgical program. Thus, the management of
each patient is determined in consultation with
cardiology and cardiovascular surgery.
plus monitoring with possible pulmonary valve
replacement
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
» Patients who undergo repair in childhood
should be counseled about the possible
need for future surgical or transcatheter
interventions.There is an increasing awareness
of the need to monitor patients for progressive
dilation of the right ventricle secondary to
longstanding pulmonary regurgitation, and the
need for pulmonary valve replacement in this
setting.
» Typically, magnetic resonance imaging
measurements are used to quantify the
pulmonary regurgitation and right ventricular
size. While there is no consensus on the exact
criteria for the timing of replacement of the
pulmonary valve, one review suggests using the
following criteria:[34]
» Repaired TOF or similar physiology with
moderate or severe pulmonary regurgitation
(regurgitation fraction ≥25% measured by
cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging)
and 2 or more of the following criteria: right
ventricular end-diastolic volume index ≥160
mL/m² (Z score >5); right ventricular end-
systolic volume index ≥70 mL/m²; left ventricular
end-diastolic volume index ≤65 mL/m²; right
ventricular ejection fraction ≤45%; right
ventricular outflow tract aneurysm; or clinical
criteria (exercise intolerance, symptoms and
signs of heart failure, cardiac medications,
syncope, or sustained ventricular tachycardia).
» Other hemodynamically significant lesions
such as moderate or severe tricuspid
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Management
Ongoing
regurgitation, residual atrial or ventricular septal
defects, and severe aortic regurgitation may
trigger referral for surgery in patients with
moderate or severe pulmonary regurgitation. In
the absence of the 6 criteria above, pulmonary
valve replacement should be considered on a
case-by-case basis.
» Due to a higher risk of adverse clinical
outcomes in patients who underwent TOF repair
at age ≥3 years, pulmonary valve replacement
may be indicated sooner and in the presence
of less severe right ventricular dilation and
dysfunction.
adjunct infective endocarditis prophylaxis
Treatment recommended for SOME patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» cephalexin: 50 mg/kg orally as a single
dose given 60 minutes before procedure,
maximum 2000 mg/dose
OR
» amoxicillin: 50 mg/kg orally as a single dose
given 60 minutes before procedure, maximum
2000 mg/dose
OR
» ampicillin: 50 mg/kg intravenously/
intramuscularly as a single dose given 30
minutes before fore procedure, maximum
2000 mg/dose
» Cardiac surgery: directed primarily against
staphylococci. First-generation cephalosporin
(e.g., cephalexin) is most commonly used,
but antibiotic choice depends on susceptibility
patterns at each hospital.[35]
» Infective endocarditis prophylaxis before
dental procedures or for procedures on the
respiratory tract or infected skin, skin structures,
or musculoskeletal tissue is required for
unrepaired cyanotic congenital heart disease
(CHD), including palliative shunts and repaired
CHD with residual defects at or adjacent to the
site of a prosthetic patch or device: directed
primarily against enterococci. Amoxicillin or
ampicillin is the preferred agent.[35]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Management
MANAGEMENT
Emerging
Percutaneous pulmonary valve
In the complete surgical repair of TOF, the stenotic portion of the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) is
dilated or reconstructed. Repair of the RVOT depends on the anatomy of the pulmonary valve and artery,
and infants frequently develop progressive pulmonary regurgitation (as in the case with transannular patch
augmentation or progressive pulmonic obstruction) as they grow. It is not uncommon for TOF patients
to need pulmonary valve replacement throughout their lives, necessitating multiple bypass surgeries.
Advancements have been made in the development of a transcatheter valved stent, and outcomes of 58
patients undergoing percutaneous pulmonary valve implantation in Europe have been reported.[37] In this
series, there were three major procedural complications and seven minor complications with no deaths.[37]
Secondary prevention
Vaccination against respiratory syncytial virus is indicated during the appropriate season.
Infective endocarditis prophylaxis before dental procedures or for procedures on the respiratory tract or
infected skin, skin structures, or musculoskeletal tissue is required for unrepaired cyanotic congenital heart
disease (CHD), including palliative shunts and repaired CHD with residual defects at or adjacent to the site of
a prosthetic patch or device.[35]
Educating patients with Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) about the significance of maintaining oral health is crucial to
prevent bacteremia and subsequent infective endocarditis.[36]
Patients with TOF should have preconception counseling. Women with repaired TOF should be evaluated by
high-risk obstetrics and a congenital cardiologist before pregnancy. The risk of having an offspring with CHD
increases 10-fold with an affected first-degree relative.[56]
A screening fetal echocardiogram may be indicated in a pregnant mother who has had other children with
CHD or has CHD herself. There are no clear guidelines.
Patient discussions
Patients should be aware that corrective repair does not mean a cure and further surgical intervention
may be required.
Patients need to be informed that having congenital heart disease (CHD) increases the risk of their
own children having CHD, and that preconception genetic testing and fetal echocardiography may be
indicated.[54]
As patients transition from adolescent to adult care, it is important to provide education on self-
management and to help them build their medical knowledge. For example, ensure that they are
equipped with the skills needed to make medical appointments and refill prescriptions, and that they
understand the importance of lifestyle interventions such as weight management and nonsmoking.[55]
Continuous neurodevelopmental assessments and customized management are essential for children
with Tetralogy of Fallot, integrating medical treatments with educational support, behavioral therapy, and
family counseling.[53]
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Follow up
Monitoring
Monitoring
Patients with surgically corrected Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) should be routinely evaluated by a pediatric
cardiologist. Neurodevelopmental follow-up is routinely indicated.[52] Research shows congenital heart
defects like TOF lead to specific neurodevelopmental issues across cognitive, behavioral, and social-
emotional areas. Early intervention and continuous support are crucial to meet these complex needs. It
is vital to identify these challenges early on and develop tailored care plans for each patient, adapting to
their changing neurodevelopmental requirements.[53]
Joint guidelines from the American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association recommend
that adult patients with repaired TOF should have routine follow-up with a cardiologist who has
expertise in adults with congenital heart disease (CHD) with recommended visit frequency and testing
increasing based on the individual patients’ physiologic stage and symptoms. They further advise that
echocardiographic exams and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) be performed on these patients by
staff with expertise in adult CHD.[39] Guidelines from the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) similarly
recommend that adults with TOF be followed up in a specialized adult CHD center.[41]
Preconception counseling and management during pregnancy is especially important for women with
repaired TOF.[54]
Echocardiograms to evaluate right ventricular (RV) function and the progression of pulmonary stenosis
or regurgitation should be performed every 1 to 5 years. The timing is patient specific, and patients with
significant progressive RV dilation, pulmonary stenosis or regurgitation, or symptoms may require at least
yearly scans.
Cardiac MRI or computed tomography is an additional tool increasingly used to evaluate RV volume and
function.[38] MRI allows for accurate 3-dimensional measurements of RV volumes and is increasingly
being used to determine timing of surgical pulmonary valve replacement.[26] Often a multimodality
approach to imaging tailored to individual patient-specific considerations will need to be considered under
the guidance of a congenital cardiologist.[26] ESC guidelines recommend performing cardiac MRI at
regular intervals according to TOF pathology.[41]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
cyanotic spells short term medium
Hypercyanotic spells present with dyspnea and severe cyanosis.
They result from contraction of the infundibular musculature creating increased right ventricular outflow
tract obstruction and increased shunting of deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle across the
ventricular septal defect to the systemic circulation.
Treatment of hypercyanotic spells is targeted toward relaxing the pulmonary obstruction and increasing
systemic vascular resistance to increase the blood flow through the pulmonary circulation.
paradoxical emboli short term low
Preoperatively, patients with TOF have a ventricular septal defect (VSD), which allows communication of
venous blood in the right heart with the systemic circulation. Normally, a thrombus in the venous circulation
that embolizes will be trapped in the pulmonary vasculature. However, the VSD provides communication
such that a thrombus can paradoxically cross the VSD and lodge in an arterial bed, causing ischemia.
Patients with known communication between the right and left cardiac chambers should have precautions
taken when using intravenous catheters, as an air bubble in the intravenous tubing can embolize to the
systemic circulation, causing end-organ ischemia.
Prophylactic anticoagulation is not commonly given to patients with TOF. However, the possibility of
venous thrombi should be carefully considered and treated aggressively if identified.
progressive pulmonary regurgitation and right
ventricular failure
long term high
A single-center study of 100 consecutive adult patients with TOF repaired in childhood who underwent
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging found poor right ventricular and left ventricular systolic function to be
independent risk factors for impaired clinical status.[51]
ventricular arrhythmias long term medium
While short-term results of surgical repair are good, the long-term results are limited by the development of
arrhythmias.
A retrospective analysis of 66 patients undergoing surgical repair of TOF between 1960 and 1993 found
28% to have no ventricular arrhythmias, 51% to have minor ventricular arrhythmias, 10.5% to have
nonsustained ventricular tachycardia, and 9% to have sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular
fibrillation.[47]
Serial ECGs have been performed to monitor the width of the QRS complex as an arrhythmogenic risk
factor.[48] If the QRS complex is noted to widen, further electrophysiologic evaluation may be necessary.
Some experts recommend periodic Holter monitors to screen for arrhythmia. Exercise testing is used by
some clinicians.
Ventricular arrhythmias may be managed with antiarrhythmic drugs, transcatheter or surgical ablation, and/
or implantation of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.[49]
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Follow up
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
atrial arrhythmias long term medium
In the past decade, atrial arrhythmias have been increasingly recognized as a common long-term
morbidity in repaired TOF. One retrospective study of adults with TOF repaired in childhood found that one
third of patients had documented atrial arrhythmias, including sinus node dysfunction, atrial fibrillation,
atrial flutter, and supraventricular tachycardia.[50]
Atrial arrhythmias are treated with transcatheter ablation or surgical ablation at the time of pulmonary valve
replacement.[49]
sudden cardiac death long term low
Sudden cardiac death from ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation is the most common cardiac
cause of death in patients with repaired TOF.[43]
It is believed to be associated with progressive right ventricular failure.
Ten years after surgery, the risk of sudden cardiac death increased from 0.06% per year to 0.2% per
year.[44]
One retrospective analysis of patients undergoing surgical repair in 1 state in the US between 1958 and
1996 found that 11 out of 445 patients with repaired TOF died of sudden cardiac death.[45]
One retrospective study of 793 adult patients who underwent surgical repair of TOF in childhood at 6
different institutions found moderate to severe pulmonary regurgitation in 100% of patients who died of
sudden cardiac death.[46]
congestive heart failure long term low
Some patients with minimal pulmonary stenosis may have symptoms of heart failure. Furosemide is
the most commonly used diuretic for symptoms of congestive heart disease. Care should be taken, as
overdiuresis may precipitate hypercyanotic spells.
Congestive heart failure is not a commonly recognized long-term complication of surgically repaired TOF.
One single-center study of 100 adults with TOF surgically repaired in childhood found 48% to be in New
York Heart Association (NYHA) class I, 40% in class II, and 12% in class III.[51]
Prognosis
Historically, the survival for untreated TOF was quite poor. In a report from the 1930s of 1000 patients with
congenital heart disease, the average life expectancy for TOF was 12 years.[42] Surgical outcomes are
excellent with survival rates of 100% at 1 month, 93% at 1 year, and 93% at 5 years after complete repair.
Freedom from reoperation rates were 100% at 1 month, 89% at 1 year, and 58% at 5 years.[29]
Once the patient has undergone complete surgical repair, the prognosis and any problems that occur may be
related to the patient's individual anatomy and type of surgical repair, as well as any associated conditions.
One study of survivors of the first year after surgical repair showed actuarial survival rates of 97% at 10
years, 94% at 20 years, 89% at 30 years, and 85% at 36 years.[43]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Common long-term complications are related to arrhythmias, progressive pulmonary outflow obstruction, and
progressive pulmonary regurgitation resulting in right ventricular failure.
Reasons for reoperation are based on progressive pulmonic obstruction and pulmonary regurgitation.
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Guidelines
Diagnostic guidelines
International
Recommendations for the adult cardiac sonographer performing
echocardiography to screen for critical congenital heart disease in the
newborn (https://www.asecho.org/guidelines-search)   [25]
Published by: American Society of Echocardiography Last published: 2021
Recommendations for multimodality assessment of congenital coronary
anomalies: a guide from the American Society of Echocardiography:
developed in collaboration with the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography
and Interventions, Japanese Society of Echocardiography, and Society for
Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance (https://www.asecho.org/guidelines-
search)   [20]
Published by: American Society of Echocardiography Last published: 2020
Multimodality imaging guidelines for patients with repaired tetralogy of
Fallot (https://www.asecho.org/guidelines-search)   [26]
Published by: American Society of Echocardiography; Society for
Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance; Society for Pediatric Radiology
Last published: 2014
Treatment guidelines
International
ACR Appropriateness Criteria: congenital or acquired heart disease
(https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/Clinical-Tools-and-Reference/
Appropriateness-Criteria)   [38]
Published by: American College of Radiology Last published: 2023
2018 AHA/ACC guidelines for the management of adults with congenital heart
disease (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-statements)   [39]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association
Last published: 2018
Diagnosis and management of noncardiac complications in adults with
congenital heart disease (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-
statements)   [40]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2017
ESC guidelines for the management of adult congenital heart disease
(previously grown-up congenital heart disease) (https://www.escardio.org/
Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [41]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2020
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Guidelines
GUIDELINES
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot References
Key articles
• Valente AM, Cook S, Festa P, et al. Multimodality imaging guidelines for patients with repaired
tetralogy of Fallot: a report from the American Society of Echocardiography: developed in collaboration
with the Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance and the Society for Pediatric Radiology. J Am
Soc Echocardiogr. 2014 Feb;27(2):111-41. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24468055?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Hirsch JC, Mosca RS, Bove EL. Complete repair of tetralogy of Fallot in the neonate: results in the
modern era. Ann Surg. 2000 Oct;232(4):508-14.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1421183)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10998649?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Habib G, Lancellotti P, Antunes MJ, et al. 2015 ESC guidelines for the management of infective
endocarditis. Eur Heart J. 2015 Nov 21;36(44):3075-128.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/36/44/3075/2293384)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26320109?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of adults
with congenital heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2019 Apr 2;139(14):e698-800. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000603)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30586767?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Lui GK, Saidi A, Bhatt AB, et al. Diagnosis and management of noncardiac complications
in adults with congenital heart disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2017 Nov 14;136(20):e348-92.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/cir.0000000000000535)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28993401?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Baumgartner H, De Backer J, Babu-Narayan SV, et al. 2020 ESC guidelines for the management
of adult congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2021 Feb 11;42(6):563-645.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/6/563/5898606?login=false)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32860028?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. Allen HD, Driscoll DJ, Shaddy RE, et al. Moss and Adams’ heart disease in infants, children, and
adolescents: including the fetus and young adult. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2007.
2. Ferencz C, Rubin JD, McCarter RJ, et al. Congenital heart disease: prevalence at livebirth. The
Baltimore-Washington Infant Study. Am J Epidemiol. 1985 Jan;121(1):31-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3964990?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot References
REFERENCES
3. Hoffman JI, Kaplan S. The incidence of congenital heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002 Jun
19;39(12):1890-900.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/s0735-1097(02)01886-7)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12084585?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Bailliard F, Anderson RH. Tetralogy of Fallot. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Jan 13;4:2.  Full text
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2651859)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19144126?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Congenital heart defects. Facts about tetralogy
of fallot. Feb 2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/heartdefects/
tetralogyoffallot.html)
6. Gill H, Splitt M, Sharland GK, et al. Patterns of recurrence of congenital heart disease: an
analysis of 6640 consecutive pregnancies evaluated by detailed fetal echocardiography. J Am
Coll Cardiol. 2003 Sep 3;42(5):923-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12957444?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Ferencz C, Correa-Villasenor A, Loffredo CA, et al. Malformations of the cardiac outflow tract. In:
Ferencz C, Correa-Villasenor A, Loffredo CA, et al, eds. Genetic and environmental risk factors of
major cardiovascular malformations: the Baltimore-Washington Infant Study: 1981-1989. Armonk, NY:
Futura Publishing Co Inc; 1997:59-102.
8. Kessler-Icekson G, Birk E, Weintraub AY, et al. Association of tetralogy of Fallot with a distinct region
of del22q11.2. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Feb 1;107(4):294-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11840485?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Momma K, Kondo C, Ando M, et al. Tetralogy of Fallot associated with chromosome 22q11 deletion.
Am J Cardiol. 1995 Sep 15;76(8):618-21. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7677092?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Li L, Krantz ID, Deng Y, et al. Alagille syndrome is caused by mutations in human Jagged1, which
encodes a ligand for Notch1. Nat Genet. 1997 Jul;16(3):243-51. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/9207788?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Krantz ID, Smith R, Colliton RP, et al. Jagged1 mutations in patients ascertained with
isolated congenital heart defects. Am J Med Genet. 1999 May 7;84(1):56-60. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10213047?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Goldmuntz E, Geiger E, Benson DW. NKX2.5 mutations in patients with tetralogy of Fallot.
Circulation. 2001 Nov 20;104(21):2565-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11714651?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Vrijheid M, Martinez D, Manzanares S, et al. Ambient air pollution and risk of congenital anomalies: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Environ Health Perspect. 2011 May;119(5):598-606. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21131253?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot References
14. Koch R, Levy HL, Matalon R, et al. The North American Collaborative Study of Maternal
Phenylketonuria. Status report 1993. Am J Dis Child. 1993 Nov;147(11):1224-30. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8237918?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Lammer EJ, Chen DT, Hoar RM, et al. Retinoic acid embryopathy. N Engl J Med. 1985 Oct
3;313(14):837-41. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3162101?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Feldman GL, Weaver DD, Lovrien EW. The fetal trimethadione syndrome: report of an additional family
and further delineation of this syndrome. Am J Dis Child. 1977 Dec;131(12):1389-92. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/412416?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Kothari SS. Mechanism of cyanotic spells in tetralogy of Fallot - the missing link? Int J Cardiol. 1992
Oct;37(1):1-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1428277?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Reich JD, Miller S, Brogdon B, et al. The use of pulse oximetry to detect congenital heart disease.
J Pediatr. 2003 Mar;142(3):268-72. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12640374?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
19. Rosati E, Chitano G, Dipaola L, et al. Indications and limitations for a neonatal pulse oximetry
screening of critical congenital heart disease. J Perinat Med. 2005;33(5):455-7. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16238542?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Frommelt P, Lopez L, Dimas VV, et al. Recommendations for multimodality assessment of congenital
coronary anomalies: a guide from the American Society of Echocardiography: developed in
collaboration with the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Japanese Society
of Echocardiography, and Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. J Am Soc Echocardiogr.
2020 Mar;33(3):259-94.  Full text (https://www.onlinejase.com/article/S0894-7317(19)31083-1/fulltext)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32143778?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Dabizzi R, Teodori G, Barletta GA, et al. Associated coronary and cardiac anomalies in the
tetralogy of Fallot. An angiographic study. Eur Heart J. 1990 Aug;11(8):692-704. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2397733?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Qureshi AM, Caldarone CA, Wilder TJ. Transcatheter approaches to palliation for tetralogy of
Fallot. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2022;25:48-57. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35835516?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
23. Kambe T, Kato T, Hibi N, et al. Differential diagnosis of pulmonary stenosis by means of intracardiac
phonocardiography. Jpn Heart J. 1976 Nov;17(6):691-705. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/1011362?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Martin GR, Beekman RH 3rd, Mikula EB, et al. Implementing recommended screening for critical
congenital heart disease. Pediatrics. 2013 Jul;132(1):e185-92. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/23776113?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Wasserman MA, Shea E, Cassidy C, et al. Recommendations for the adult cardiac sonographer
performing echocardiography to screen for critical congenital heart disease in the newborn: from
the American Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2021 Mar;34(3):207-22. 
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot References
REFERENCES
Full text (https://www.onlinejase.com/article/S0894-7317(20)30779-3/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33518447?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Valente AM, Cook S, Festa P, et al. Multimodality imaging guidelines for patients with repaired
tetralogy of Fallot: a report from the American Society of Echocardiography: developed in collaboration
with the Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance and the Society for Pediatric Radiology. J Am
Soc Echocardiogr. 2014 Feb;27(2):111-41. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24468055?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Yuan SM, Shinfeld A, Raanani E. The Blalock-Taussig shunt. J Card Surg. 2009 Mar-Apr;24(2):101-8. 
Full text (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1540-8191.2008.00758.x/full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19040408?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Saxena A, Ramakrishnan S, Tandon R, et al; Working Group on Management of Congenital Heart
Diseases in India. Consensus on timing of intervention for common congenital heart diseases. Indian
Pediatr. 2008 Feb;45(2):117-26.  Full text (http://www.indianpediatrics.net/feb2008/117.pdf)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18310790?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Hirsch JC, Mosca RS, Bove EL. Complete repair of tetralogy of Fallot in the neonate: results in the
modern era. Ann Surg. 2000 Oct;232(4):508-14.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1421183)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10998649?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Parry AJ, McElhinney DB, Kung GC, et al. Elective primary repair of acyanotic tetralogy
of Fallot in early infancy: overall outcome and impact on the pulmonary valve. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2000 Dec;36(7):2279-83. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11127473?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
31. Knott-Craig CJ, Elkins RC, Lane MM, et al. A 26-year experience with surgical management
of tetralogy of Fallot: risk analysis for mortality or late reintervention. Ann Thorac Surg. 1998
Aug;66(2):506-11. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9725393?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Oosterhof T, van Straten A, Vliegen HW, et al. Preoperative thresholds for pulmonary valve
replacement in patients with corrected tetralogy of Fallot using cardiovascular magnetic resonance.
Circulation. 2007 Jul 31;116(5):545-51.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/116/5/545.full)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17620511?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
33. Therrien J, Provost Y, Merchant N, et al. Optimal timing for pulmonary valve replacement in
adults after tetralogy of Fallot repair. Am J Cardiol. 2005 Mar 15;95(6):779-82. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15757612?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34. Geva T. Indications and timing of pulmonary valve replacement after tetralogy of Fallot repair. Semin
Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Pediatr Card Surg Annu. 2006:11-22. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16638542?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Habib G, Lancellotti P, Antunes MJ, et al. 2015 ESC guidelines for the management of infective
endocarditis. Eur Heart J. 2015 Nov 21;36(44):3075-128.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/36/44/3075/2293384)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26320109?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot References
36. Delgado V, Ajmone Marsan N, de Waha S, et al. 2023 ESC guidelines for the management of
endocarditis. Eur Heart J. 2023 Oct 14;44(39):3948-4042.  Full text (https://academic.oup.com/
eurheartj/article/44/39/3948/7243107)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37622656?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Khambadkone S, Coats L, Taylor A, et al. Percutaneous pulmonary valve implantation in
humans: results in 59 consecutive patients. Circulation. 2005 Aug 23;112(8):1189-97.  Full
text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/112/8/1189.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16103239?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. American College of Radiology. ACR Appropriateness Criteria® congenital or acquired heart disease.
2023 [internet publication].  Full text (https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/3102389/Narrative)
39. Stout KK, Daniels CJ, Aboulhosn JA, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of adults
with congenital heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on clinical practice guidelines. Circulation. 2019 Apr 2;139(14):e698-800. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000603)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30586767?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Lui GK, Saidi A, Bhatt AB, et al. Diagnosis and management of noncardiac complications
in adults with congenital heart disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation. 2017 Nov 14;136(20):e348-92.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/
doi/10.1161/cir.0000000000000535)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28993401?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
41. Baumgartner H, De Backer J, Babu-Narayan SV, et al. 2020 ESC guidelines for the management
of adult congenital heart disease. Eur Heart J. 2021 Feb 11;42(6):563-645.  Full text (https://
academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/6/563/5898606?login=false)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32860028?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Abbott ME. Atlas of congenital cardiac disease. New York, NY: American Heart Association; 1936.
43. Nollert G, Fischlein T, Bouterwek S, et al. Long-term survival in patients with repair of tetralogy
of Fallot: 36-year follow-up of 490 survivors of the first year after surgical repair. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 1997 Nov 1;30(5):1374-83. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9350942?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Nollert G, Däbritz SH, Schmoeckel M, et al. Risk factors for sudden death after repair of tetralogy
of Fallot. Ann Thorac Surg. 2003 Dec;76(6):1901-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/14667608?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Silka M, Hardy BG, Menashe VD, et al. A population-based prospective evaluation of risk of
sudden cardiac death after operation for common congenital heart defects. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998
Jul;32(1):245-51. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9669277?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Gatzoulis MA, Balaji S, Webber SA, et al. Risk factors for arrhythmia and sudden cardiac death late
after repair of tetralogy of Fallot: a multicentre study. Lancet. 2000 Sep 16;356(9234):975-81. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11041398?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot References
REFERENCES
47. Daliento L, Rizzoli G, Menti L, et al. Accuracy of electrocardiographic and echocardiographic indices
in predicting life threatening ventricular arrhythmias in patients operated for tetralogy of Fallot. Heart.
1999 Jun;81(6):650-5.  Full text (https://heart.bmj.com/content/81/6/650.long)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10336927?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Gatzoulis MA, Till JA, Somerville J, et al. Mechanoelectrical interaction in tetralogy of Fallot: QRS
prolongation relates to right ventricular size and predicts malignant ventricular arrhythmias and sudden
death. Circulation. 1995 Jul 15;92(2):231-7. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7600655?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Krieger EV, Zeppenfeld K, DeWitt ES, et al. Arrhythmias in repaired tetralogy of Fallot: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2022
Nov;15(11):e000084.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/HAE.0000000000000084?
rfr_dat=cr_pub++0pubmed&url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36263773?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Roos-Hesselink J, Perlroth MG, McGhie J, et al. Atrial arrhythmias in adults after repair of tetralogy
of Fallot. Correlations with clinical, exercise, and echocardiographic findings. Circulation. 1995 Apr
15;91(8):2214-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7697851?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
51. Geva T, Sandweiss BM, Gauvreau K, et al. Factors associated with impaired clinical status in long-
term survivors of tetralogy of Fallot repair evaluated by magnetic resonance imaging. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2004 Mar 17;43(6):1068-74. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15028368?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Lisanti AJ, Uzark KC, Harrison TM, et al. Developmental care for hospitalized infants with complex
congenital heart disease: a science advisory from the American Heart Association. J Am Heart Assoc.
2023 Feb 7;12(3):e028489.  Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/JAHA.122.028489?
url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36648070?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Sood E, Newburger JW, Anixt JS, et al. Neurodevelopmental outcomes for individuals with congenital
heart disease: updates in neuroprotection, risk-stratification, evaluation, and management: a scientific
statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2024 Mar 26;149(13):e997-1022. 
Full text (https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001211)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38385268?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Canobbio MM, Warnes CA, Aboulhosn J, et al; American Heart Association. Management of
pregnancy in patients with complex congenital heart disease: a scientific statement for healthcare
professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017 Feb 21;135(8):e50-87.  Full
text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/135/8/e50.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28082385?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
55. John AS, Jackson JL, Moons P, et al. Advances in managing transition to adulthood for adolescents
with congenital heart disease: a practical approach to transition program design: a scientific statement
from the American Heart Association. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022 Apr 5;11(7):e025278.  Full text
(https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/JAHA.122.025278)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/35297271?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot References
56. Siu SC, Colman JM. Heart disease and pregnancy. Heart. 2001 Jun;85(6):710-5.  Full text (http://
heart.bmj.com/content/85/6/710.long)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11359761?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Images
IMAGES
Images
Figure 1: Anatomy and pathophysiology of tetralogy of Fallot (TOF): normal heart structure (a) promotes
unidirectional flow of deoxygenated blood (blue) into the lungs and oxygenated blood (red) into the aorta;
in TOF (b) pulmonary stenosis and narrowing of the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) impedes the flow
of deoxygenated blood into the lungs, and both the ventricular septal defect (VSD) and overriding aorta
(*) promote the flow of deoxygenated blood into the systemic circulation, to produce cyanosis (sometimes
referred to as “blue baby” syndrome), right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH) is also present; (c) a Doppler
echocardiogram shows mixing of deoxygenated blood from the right ventricle (RV) and oxygenated blood
from the left ventricle (LV) as blood is pumped out the over-riding aorta (Ao) in a patient with TOF (RA=right
atrium, LA=left atrium)
Multimedia Library of Congenital Heart Disease, Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, editor Robert Geggel, MD;
used with permission
Figure 2: ECG in tetralogy of Fallot showing right ventricular hypertrophy
From the collection of Dr Jeffrey Gossett; used with permission
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Disclaimer
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Tetralogy of Fallot Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Jul 12, 2024.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
Jeffrey Gossett, MD
Vice President and System Chief of Pediatric Cardiology
Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Cohen Children’s Medical Center, Northwell Health,
New Hyde Park, NY
DISCLOSURES: JG declares that he has no competing interests.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr Jeffrey Gossett would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr Anna Kamp, a previous contributor to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: AK declares that she has no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Adam B. Christopher, MD
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics
Director of Cardiac MRI, UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
DISCLOSURES: ABC declares that he has no competing interests.
Ranjit Aiyagari, MD
Clinical Assistant Professor of Pediatrics
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
DISCLOSURES: RA declares that he has no competing interests.
Michael Cheung, BSc, MBChB, MD
Deputy Director
Department of Cardiology, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia
DISCLOSURES: MC declares that he has no competing interests.
