# Tricuspid stenosis

=== Page 1 ===
Tricuspid stenosis
Straight to the point of care
Last updated: Apr 02, 2025
=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Overview  3
Summary  3
Definition  3
Theory  4
Epidemiology  4
Etiology  4
Pathophysiology  4
Case history  6
Diagnosis  7
Approach  7
History and exam  9
Risk factors  11
Tests  13
Differentials  16
Criteria  16
Management  18
Approach  18
Treatment algorithm overview  20
Treatment algorithm  22
Emerging  26
Primary prevention  26
Secondary prevention  26
Patient discussions  26
Follow up  27
Monitoring  27
Complications  28
Prognosis  28
Guidelines  30
Diagnostic guidelines  30
Treatment guidelines  31
References  32
Images  39
Disclaimer  42
=== Page 3 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Overview
Summary
Tricuspid stenosis (TS) most commonly occurs as a late complication of acute rheumatic fever.
TS rarely occurs in the absence of associated rheumatic mitral and/or aortic disease.
Dyspnea is a common finding and usually relates to concomitant mitral valve stenosis.
Prominent a-waves in the jugular venous wave form are a hallmark of tricuspid stenosis in patients who are in
sinus rhythm.
Transthoracic echocardiogram with Doppler flow is accurate for diagnosis.
Most effective therapy is valve replacement.
Definition
TS is a rare condition defined by an abnormally elevated pressure gradient across the tricuspid valve during
diastolic filling of the right ventricle.
OVERVIEW
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
3
=== Page 4 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Theory
THEORY
Epidemiology
Rheumatic heart disease (RHD) is by far the most common cause of tricuspid stenosis (TS) in the US
and throughout the world. In developed countries, the relative incidence of acute rheumatic fever (ARF)
significantly decreased over the 20th century; however, the burden of ARF and RHD remains high in
developing countries.[6] The Global Burden of Disease study estimated 38.0 to 40.8 million cases of RHD
globally in 2017, with the highest prevalence, disability, and mortality in Oceania, South Asia, and sub-
Saharan Africa. The prevalence ranged from 3.4 cases per 100,000 population in nonendemic countries
to >1000 cases per 100,000 in endemic countries, with endemic defined as greater than 0.15 deaths per
100,000 population among children ages 5-9 years.[7] Socioeconomic and environmental factors such
as shortage of resources, lack of healthcare providers, and low level of awareness all contribute to the
continued high incidence of ARF and RHD in developing countries. In developed countries such as the US, it
is estimated that up to 50% of those with a history of ARF and carditis will go on to have chronic RHD.[8] [9]
Isolated tricuspid valve involvement is extremely rare and clinical TS is usually discovered concomitantly
with mitral and often aortic valve disease.[3] [10] [11] The overall incidence of TS in patients with RHD has
been estimated at 9% to 15%, with clinically significant and more severe forms occurring in only 5%.[3] [12]
[13] [14] [15] This results in an overall estimated prevalence of rheumatic TS in the US of 0.003 per 1000
population.
The incidence of ARF is equal between males and females; however, females tend to develop significant
RHD more commonly.[16] [17] The only race in the US that has been shown to develop ARF and RHD at
relatively higher rates are those of Polynesian descent living in Hawaii.
Carcinoid heart disease occurs in 40% to 50% of patients with carcinoid syndrome and typically leads to
tricuspid and pulmonary valve dysfunction.[18] [19]
The incidence of congenital TS is rare, occurring in <0.1% of the population.
Etiology
Tricuspid stenosis (TS) most commonly occurs as a late complication of rheumatic heart disease (RHD). The
etiology of rheumatic TS is still not entirely understood. In nearly all cases, an antecedent case of group A
streptococcal pharyngitis is required.
Rare causes of TS include carcinoid syndrome, infective endocarditis, and congenital disease. Carcinoid
heart disease usually only occurs in patients whose primary intestinal tumor has metastasized to the liver, at
which time a paraneoplastic process causes the tricuspid valve abnormalities.[19]
Infective endocarditis affecting the tricuspid valve can also lead to TS and is most common among those who
are intravenous drug abusers or those who have anatomically abnormal tricuspid valves at baseline.
The etiology of congenital TS is not known, but is thought to be multifactorial with genetics and environmental
factors both playing a role.
Pathophysiology
Anatomic abnormalities of the stenotic tricuspid valve vary by root cause, but generally include fusion of
commissural leaflets and foreshortened chordae tendineae.
4 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 5 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Theory
In rheumatic heart disease (RHD), antibody cross-reactivity between antigens of group A streptococcus
(GAS) and host valve tissue leads to an inflammatory response. This ultimately causes progressive fibrin
deposition within the valve leaflet and along the cusps. Eventual fusion of leaflet commissures ensues and
the chordae tendineae become thickened, fused, and foreshortened, resulting in tricuspid stenosis (TS).
GAS-specific immunogenicity, host genetic predisposition, and degree of molecular mimicry are all thought to
play a role in the development of acute rheumatic fever (ARF) and subsequent RHD.[6] [20]
In carcinoid syndrome, the metastatic carcinoid tumors produce paraneoplastic substances (e.g., serotonin),
which are thought to lead to the characteristic endocardial fibrous white plaque formation within the valve
leaflets and tricuspid valve chordal apparatus.[19] These fibrous depositions lead to valve distortion,
foreshortened leaflets, and the inability of the valve to coapt and open completely, resulting in TS and often
tricuspid valve regurgitation.
Infective endocarditis involving the tricuspid valve occurs when certain virulent strains of bacteria circulating
in the bloodstream adhere to the surface of the valve. The subsequent inflammatory process results in fibrin,
platelet, leukocyte, and red blood cell deposition along the valve leaflet with resulting vegetation formation.
Vegetations can then result in further valve thickening, valve perforation, failure of coaptation, and ultimately
in a reduced valve orifice and stenosis.
Congenital TS results in some degree of hypoplasia of the right ventricle, pulmonary outflow, and an atrial
level shunt. It usually results in annular hypoplasia, incompletely developed leaflets, abnormal chordae
tendineae, and dysplastic papillary muscles.
Distortion of the tricuspid valve apparatus and deficiency of the effective valve orifice are pathognomonic
findings for all forms of TS, regardless of etiology. This reduction in the size of the valve orifice results in
obstruction of blood flow from the right atrium into the right ventricle during diastole. Because the pressures
in the right side of the heart are normally low, a pressure gradient as low as 5 mmHg can result in elevated
right atrial pressures, depending on the atrial compliance.[11] [21] Chronically elevated right atrial pressures
lead to signs and symptoms of systemic venous congestion including prominent jugular venous pulsations
with an exaggerated a-wave. In more severe forms of TS, pulmonary blood flow is significantly decreased
and cardiac output can become limited, especially at times of increased requirements (i.e., exercise). Right
atrial enlargement and hypertrophy can contribute to the development of atrial fibrillation, which significantly
exaggerates the symptoms of venous congestion due to the lack of atrial systole.
Congenital tricuspid valve stenosis: 2D transthoracic echocardiogram apical 4 chamber view reveals
a small tricuspid valve annulus (dash), RV hypoplasia, and a large atrial septal defect (ASD, arrow)
From the personal collection of Martin Bocks; used with permission
THEORY
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
5
=== Page 6 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Theory
THEORY
Case history
Case history #1
An otherwise healthy 35-year-old man presents with complaints of fatigue, lower extremity swelling,
fluttering neck sensation, and a sense of abdominal fullness. Symptoms began to occur over the last few
months and have been slowly progressive. The patient, who is an avid cyclist, reports increasing dyspnea
on exertion and the inability to exercise to his usual capacity. The patient's medical history is notable
for an intermittent murmur, which was typically described as "innocent" when heard at routine well-child
and health maintenance examinations. He underwent tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy at age 7 years
for recurrent pharyngitis. There is no family history of early coronary artery disease, cardiomyopathy, or
sudden death. He does not smoke and rarely drinks alcohol.
Other presentations
Tricuspid stenosis (TS) can occur as a result of bacterial endocarditis, especially among patients with
endocardial pacemaker leads, artificial tricuspid valves, or in intravenous drug abusers.[1] [2] Under
these conditions, the typical presenting symptoms may also include fever and other stigmata of infective
endocarditis.
Congenital TS typically presents during infancy or very early childhood, as opposed to adulthood. It is
often associated with other structural heart defects and often presents with cyanosis when an atrial level
shunt is also present.
Carcinoid heart disease can cause TS and should be considered in any patient with typical carcinoid
features, including facial flushing, intractable secretory diarrhea, and bronchoconstriction.
TS caused by rheumatic heart disease can present with atrial fibrillation in up to 40% to 70% of
patients.[3] [4] [5]
6 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 7 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
Approach
Clinically significant tricuspid stenosis (TS) can be suspected based on a history of acute rheumatic fever
(ARF) as a child, presenting symptoms (fatigue, extremity swelling, fluttering neck discomfort, abdominal
discomfort, or dyspnea), and on classic physical examination findings.[27] However, further studies such as
ECG, echocardiogram, and cardiac catheterization are typically used to confirm the diagnosis. By far the
most common presentation is as a late result of a single severe case or, multiple recurrent episodes of ARF
and typically occurs anywhere from 16 to 40 years after initial group A streptococcus (GAS) exposure.[28]
History
Although the age range can vary, patients usually present at ages 20-39 years.[6] Most patients with
symptomatic TS will present with fatigue, extremity swelling, fluttering neck discomfort, abdominal
discomfort, or dyspnea that is slowly progressive over a period of months to years. The fatigue usually
relates to some degree of limited cardiac output. The dyspnea usually results from concomitant rheumatic
mitral stenosis, and is usually more pronounced when attempting exercise. The other symptoms relate to
systemic venous congestion causing hepatomegaly, elevated jugular venous pressure (JVP), ascites, and
edema.
A critical piece of information to acquire is whether or not there is an antecedent history of ARF. Many
adult patients may not have been informed of their actual diagnosis during childhood or the disease may
have never been discovered. These patients may only remember an illness with a prolonged fever, rash,
or severe joint pain. Similarly, the patient may only remember having had to endure a prolonged period
of bed rest and being away from school. A history of persistent heart murmur beginning in late childhood
that has been passed-off as benign or innocent may also be the only historical clue to antecedent episode
of ARF. If a history of ARF is denied or unknown, these historical items should be sought out specifically.
Features of flushing, diarrhea, and bronchospasm should raise the possibility of carcinoid syndrome,
and these patients have a 50% chance of cardiac involvement. The vast majority of patients with cardiac
involvement present with signs of right heart failure secondary to severe dysfunction of the tricuspid and
pulmonary valves.
Patients may present with unremitting or recurrent fever with generalized malaise and other physical
stigmata of bacterial endocarditis. The patient may have an antecedent history of tricuspid valve
replacement or intravenous drug use.
Congenital stenosis usually presents in infancy or at an early age with symptoms of right heart failure and
cyanosis and is often associated with other structural heart defects.
Physical examination
The patient's vital signs are often normal. Jugular venous pulsations are often elevated and a prominent
presystolic a-wave during atrial contraction is considered to be a classic finding. However, in the presence
of atrial fibrillation (patients with rheumatic TS may present with atrial fibrillation) when atrial systole is
lost, this classic finding is absent, resulting in a lower index of suspicion for TS.
Hepatomegaly, ascites, and peripheral edema are often observed in patients with moderate to severe TS.
Focused cardiac examination reveals cardinal signs of TS. The precordium is usually quiet without a
right ventricular lift or heave. A soft, low-frequency presystolic murmur can usually be auscultated at the
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
7
=== Page 8 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
lower left sternal border in the fourth intercostal space. The murmur can be intensified with maneuvers
that increase blood flow across the valve (e.g., inspiration, squatting, and isotonic exercise). An opening
snap can sometimes be heard, but is often confused with the opening snap of a stenotic mitral valve,
which is also often present. Similarly, the presystolic murmur of TS is often missed or attributed to mitral
valve stenosis. Although there are characteristics of the two murmurs that can help differentiate one from
the other, a high index of suspicion must be maintained for tricuspid valve involvement in a patient with
polyvalvular rheumatic heart disease (RHD).
Patients with endocarditis-associated TS will present with the same physical findings discussed above,
occasionally with the physical stigmata of bacterial endocarditis (e.g., splinter hemorrhages, Osler nodes,
and Janeway lesions).
Hypoxemia predominates with congenital TS secondary to right-to-left atrial level shunting.
There are no specific physical examination findings in patients with carcinoid heart disease that
distinguish it from other forms of TS.
Laboratory evaluation
CBC and blood cultures should be used to evaluate for bacterial endocarditis. Comprehensive metabolic
profile should be obtained to evaluate for significant hepatic congestion associated with systemic venous
hypertension and as a general estimate of end-organ dysfunction (e.g., renal insufficiency). If carcinoid
heart disease is suspected, 24-hour urinary excretion of 5-hydroxy-indole acetic acid (5-HIAA) may be
used to determine whether it is present.
Specialist referral, ECG, and imaging
If a patient presents to a physician with a history concerning for ARF and many of the signs and
symptoms described, it is appropriate to refer the patient to a cardiologist for further evaluation. The
cardiology evaluation is likely to include repeat physical examination, chest x-ray, ECG, echocardiogram,
and possibly referral for cardiac catheterization. Echocardiogram should be performed at the time
the diagnosis is being considered; in general this is performed and interpreted by a specialist. Initial
echocardiogram is usually transthoracic (2D or Doppler); however, transesophageal or 3D studies may be
necessary if adequate images cannot be obtained. This includes cardiac MRI, which can help delineate
tricuspid valve morphology and function as well as evaluate for underlying causes of tricuspid stenosis or
better characterize the hemodynamic impact of tricuspid stenosis (e.g., right atrial dilation).[29]
Although there are no clearly defined criteria in the literature for TS severity, severe TS is usually
defined by the onset of overt symptoms accompanied by a mean gradient by echocardiogram or cardiac
catheterization of ≥5 mmHg or >7 to 10 mmHg depending on the method and definition.[30] [31] [32]
[33] Mild to moderate TS is usually asymptomatic, and has no clearly defined gradient range beyond the
definition of TS diagnosed on a gradient of ≥2 mmHg. 
8 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 9 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
Hemodynamic tracings obtained during cardiac catheterization from
a woman with moderate to severe rheumatic tricuspid valve stenosis
From the personal collection of Martin Bocks; used with permission
Cardiac MRI may be useful in identifying valve abnormalities in carcinoid heart disease and reliably
detecting progressive dilatation and right ventricle dysfunction.[34] [35] [36]
Other imaging to consider includes cardiac computed tomography angiography (CTA) and [18F]
fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT), particularly to
detect valvular lesions and confirm endocarditis in cases where echocardiography has been inconclusive.
[2]
History and exam
Key diagnostic factors
history of acute rheumatic fever (ARF) during childhood (common)
• Most common cause of rheumatic valvular disease and tricuspid stenosis (TS). A positive history
should increase index of suspicion.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
9
=== Page 10 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
dyspnea (common)
• Usually due to concomitant mitral stenosis, which is present in >95% of cases of rheumatic TS.[3] [10]
[11] [37] The absence or resolution of dyspnea may indicate progression of TS with severely limited
pulmonary blood flow.
elevated jugular venous pressure with prominent a-wave (common)
• Prominent a-waves are hallmarks of TS in patients in sinus rhythm. In patients with atrial fibrillation, a-
wave is lost, but jugular venous pressures are still elevated.
low-frequency presystolic (diastolic) murmur at lower left sternal border
(common)
• Can be confused or attributed to similar murmur heard with mitral stenosis. Must have high index of
suspicion for TS if other signs of right heart involvement are present. Murmur increases in intensity
with inspiration and squatting.
Other diagnostic factors
age: 20-39 years (common)
• This is the most common age for rheumatic heart disease (RHD) to present following childhood acute
rheumatic fever (ARF).[6] 
exercise intolerance (common)
• In severe forms, cardiac output may be limited leading to fatigue and exercise intolerance.
fatigue (common)
• In severe forms, cardiac output may be limited leading to fatigue and exercise intolerance.
jugular pulsations (common)
• Prominent venous pulsations in the neck may cause fluttering and patient discomfort.
abdominal swelling and discomfort (common)
• Due to hepatomegaly and ascites from chronic systemic venous congestion.
edema (common)
• Occurs especially in extremities.
cyanosis or hypoxemia (common)
• Due to right-to-left atrial level shunting.
atrial fibrillation (common)
• TS caused by rheumatic heart disease can present with atrial fibrillation in up to 40% to 70% of
patients.
hepatomegaly (common)
• Can be pulsatile in severe forms of TS.
10 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 11 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
ascites, edema, anasarca (common)
• Related to degree of systemic venous hypertension.
age: infancy or childhood (uncommon)
• Congenital TS presents at an early age, and is often associated with cyanosis or other structural heart
defects.
episodic facial flushing, watery diarrhea, or bronchoconstriction
(uncommon)
• Symptoms of patients with carcinoid heart disease. These patients will also present with the symptoms
of TS.
absent right ventricular lift or heave (uncommon)
• The absence of this sign suggests the right ventricle is protected from volume or pressure overload.
In patients with mitral stenosis and pulmonary hypertension, right heart pressures are elevated and a
right ventricular lift is usually present.
opening snap (uncommon)
• Can often be confused with opening snap of rheumatic mitral stenosis. However, the opening snap of
TS will intensify during inspiration.
endocarditis stigmata (e.g., splinter hemorrhages, Osler nodes, Janeway
lesions) (uncommon)
• Physical findings that relate to intracardiac vegetations embolizing to systemic peripheral arterial beds.
Most commonly found in left-sided vegetations or if an intracardiac communication is present (e.g.,
patent foramen ovale).
Risk factors
Strong
group A streptococcal (GAS) pharyngitis
• Outbreaks of acute rheumatic fever (ARF) follow epidemics of GAS pharyngitis or scarlet fever.
Antibiotic treatment programs for documented GAS pharyngitis have markedly reduced the incidence
of ARF and rheumatic heart disease (RHD).[6] Most patients with ARF develop elevated antibody titers
to anti-streptococcal antigens, including streptolysin O, hyaluronidase, and streptokinase. Human host
antibodies directed against GAS antigens have been demonstrated to cross-react with antigens (e.g.,
myosin, tropomyosin, and laminin) of the human heart.[6][22] [23] [24]
metastatic carcinoid tumors
• Carcinoid heart disease usually only occurs in patients whose primary intestinal tumor has
metastasized to the liver.[19] Metastatic carcinoid tumors produce paraneoplastic substances
(e.g., serotonin), which are thought to lead to the characteristic endocardial fibrous white plaque
formation within the valve leaflets and tricuspid valve chordal apparatus, which lead to valve distortion,
foreshortened leaflets, and the inability of the valve to coapt and open completely.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
11
=== Page 12 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Weak
artificial tricuspid valve
• Tricuspid valve replacement leads to abnormal flow characteristics that predispose to bacterial
superinfection in rare cases.
intravenous drug use
• Intravenous drug use provides a direct route for introducing bacteria into the bloodstream with
secondary seeding of the tricuspid valve. Bacterial endocarditis secondary to intravenous drug use
may rarely lead to leaflet thickening and fibrosis even in the presence of a previously normal valve.
pacemaker/defibrillator leads crossing tricuspid valve orifice
• Adhesions between lead and valve may lead to progressive fibrosis and restricted valve motion.[1]
genetic predisposition and environmental factors
• Etiology of congenital tricuspid stenosis is presumed to be multifactorial with genetics and
environmental factors both playing a role.
12 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 13 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
Tests
1st test to order
Test Result
ECG
• If sinus rhythm is present, a key finding is tall, peaked P-waves
(>2.5 mm in II, III, V1) of right atrial enlargement in the absence of
RVH.[11] Atrial fibrillation is present in up to 40% to 70% of patients
with rheumatic tricuspid stenosis (TS).[3] [4] [5]
sinus rhythm versus atrial
fibrillation
chest x-ray
• Findings are nonspecific.
cardiomediastinal
silhouette may be normal
in size to mildly enlarged,
right atrial enlargement
and prominence of right
heart border may be
appreciated; presence
of single or multiple
pulmonary opacities
may indicate pulmonary
embolization and
abscess formation from
vegetations in the right
heart with infective
endocarditis
2D transthoracic echocardiogram
• Normal appearing valve by 2D echocardiogram does not exclude
TS. Doppler echocardiography also needs to be performed. The
presence of an abnormally appearing tricuspid valve with normal
appearing mitral and aortic valves should prompt consideration for
carcinoid heart disease and dissuade the clinician from rheumatic
heart disease as the etiology. Right atrial enlargement with dilated
systemic and hepatic veins is consistent with more severe TS.
thickened, fused, and
doming tricuspid valve
leaflets, restricted leaflet
motion, reduced diameter
of valve orifice, right atrial
enlargement with dilated
systemic and hepatic
veins
Doppler transthoracic echocardiogram
• Transthoracic echocardiogram with Doppler has largely replaced
cardiac catheterization as a means to diagnose TS and correlates
well with hemodynamic data obtained during catheterization.[38]
[39] Valve area has not correlated well with severity and has not
been validated for clinical use. In the presence of moderate to severe
tricuspid regurgitation, the valve area can be underestimated. A
calculated valve area based on continuity equation <4.0 to 4.9 cm²
is clinically significant TS. Others have indicated that a valve area <1
cm², a pressure gradient of ≥5 mmHg or >7 to 10 mmHg (depending
on definition), and a pressure half time of >190 msec indicates severe
TS.[31] [32][33]
elevated mean tricuspid
valve gradient >2 mmHg,
prolonged slope of
antegrade flow; peak
velocity across tricuspid
valve >0.7 m/second
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
13
=== Page 14 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Test Result
Echocardiogram with color Doppler reveals flow
acceleration across the tricuspid valve and spectral
Doppler reveals a mean TV gradient of 6 mmHg
From the personal collection of Martin Bocks; used with permission
liver function tests
• Specificity for TS is poor. A normal value may also be obtained.
mild elevation of
aminotransferases may
be present secondary to
chronic hepatic venous
congestion
blood biochemistry
• Minor metabolic abnormalities may be present depending on the
extent of disease, such as elevated BUN and creatinine in renal
insufficiency.
abnormalities
CBC
• Polycythemia may suggest chronic hypoxemia secondary to
diminished pulmonary blood flow or right-to-left shunting at the atrial
level. Leukocytosis may indicate infective endocarditis.
polycythemia in chronic
hypoxemia or leukocytosis
in infective endocarditis
blood cultures
• Bacterial or fungal cultures may indicate infective endocarditis.
positive in infective
endocarditis
24-hour urinary excretion of 5-hydroxy-indole acetic acid (5-
HIAA)
• Twenty-four-hour urinary excretion of 5-HIAA is 10-fold higher than
normal level in patients with carcinoid heart disease.[18]
elevated in carcinoid
heart disease
14 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 15 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
Other tests to consider
Test Result
cardiac catheterization
• Simultaneous right atrial and right ventricular pressures must be
obtained over 8 to 10 cardiac cycles while breath-holding after normal
inspiration. Tricuspid valve gradient can be provoked with normal
saline bolus infusions. 
transvalvular mean
diastolic gradient ≥2
mmHg indicates TS and a
gradient ≥5 mgHg or >7 to
10 mmHg (depending on
definition) is considered
severe
cardiac MRI
• May be useful in identifying valve abnormalities in carcinoid heart
disease and reliably detecting progressive dilatation and right
ventricle dysfunction.[34] [35] [36]
valve abnormalities;
progressive right ventricle
dilatation
3D transthoracic echocardiogram
• May provide better anatomical imaging and more consistent
estimations of valve area. May also be useful in identifying valve
abnormalities in carcinoid heart disease.[35]
may provide better
anatomical imaging
and more consistent
estimations of valve area
cardiac CT angiography (CTA)
• May detect valve or paravalvular abnormalities not detected on
echocardiogram.[2]
valve abnormalities
in nonvegetative
endocarditis, paravalvular
abscesses, periprosthetic
valve complications
[18F] fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET/CT
• May be used to confirm diagnosis of endocarditis with or without
positive blood cultures.[2]
evidence of infective
endocarditis, involved
structures, embolic
disease
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
15
=== Page 16 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
DIAGNOSIS
Differentials
Condition Differentiating signs /
symptoms
Differentiating tests
Cardiac tumors • There are no specific
differentiating signs/
symptoms.
• Echocardiogram will
often show tumors and
differentiate cause.
Systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE)
• Malar rash, arthritis/
arthralgias, pancytopenia,
photosensitivity, renal
involvement, alopecia, or
Raynaud's phenomenon.
• Antinuclear antibody, anti-
dsDNA or anti-Sm antibodies
may be positive in SLE.
Constrictive pericarditis
(CP)
• Usually have a previous
history of tuberculosis,
pericarditis, cardiac surgery,
mantle radiation, chest
trauma, or connective tissue
disease. Murmurs are
rare with CP and jugular
venous pulsations are less
prominent.
• Calcification of pericardium
sometimes seen on chest x-
ray.
• Echocardiogram shows
only mildly enlarged atrium
and normal tricuspid valve
without a gradient.
• Cardiac catheterization
reveals absence of tricuspid
valve gradient and classic
hemodynamic findings of CP.
Restrictive
cardiomyopathy
• History is usually
unremarkable. Systolic
murmurs of mitral and
tricuspid regurgitation are
most common. Diastolic
murmurs are less common.
Jugular venous pulsations
can be prominent.
• Echocardiogram shows
severe bi-atrial enlargement
in the absence of significant
AV valve gradient. Valve can
sometimes be thickened,
but shortened chordae and
commissural fusion are
rarely discovered.
• Cardiac catheterization
reveals classic findings of
restrictive cardiomyopathy
without tricuspid valve
gradient.
Criteria
Tricuspid stenosis (TS) severity
Although there are no clearly defined criteria in the literature for TS severity, severe TS is usually defined by
the onset of overt symptoms accompanied by a mean gradient by echocardiogram or cardiac catheterization
of ≥5 mmHg or >7 to 10 mmHg depending on the method and definition.[30] [31] [32] [33] Mild to moderate
TS is usually asymptomatic, and has no clearly defined gradient range beyond the definition of TS diagnosed
on a gradient of ≥2 mmHg. 
16 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 17 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Diagnosis
Hemodynamic tracings obtained during cardiac catheterization from
a woman with moderate to severe rheumatic tricuspid valve stenosis
From the personal collection of Martin Bocks; used with permission
 Supportive findings for hemodynamically significant TS include right atrial enlargement and a dilated inferior
vena cava.
DIAGNOSIS
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
17
=== Page 18 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Approach
The main goal of treatment is to relieve the symptoms that result from restricted diastolic filling of the right
ventricle and diminished pulmonary blood flow.
Symptomatic management
Initial medical care consists of:
• Assessment and treatment of the underlying etiology for the valvular pathology (e.g., antibiotics for
bacterial endocarditis or somatostatin analogs for carcinoid syndrome)
• Fluid and sodium restriction
• Medications to treat cardiac arrhythmias secondary to right atrial distension (usually atrial fibrillation
and/or flutter)
• Pharmacotherapy with diuretics to reduce morbidity associated with systemic venous congestion.
Activity is usually self-limited by the patient due to easy fatigability and diminished pulmonary blood flow.
Surgery
If right heart failure persists or if low cardiac output develops, surgical commissurotomy or valve
replacement is indicated. Historically, the morbidity and mortality of tricuspid valve replacement have
been very high, with most series reporting operative mortality in excess of 20%.[43] However, surgery
on the tricuspid valve is most commonly carried out alongside surgery for other valve dysfunction, and
many patients are treated later in the course of the disease.[36] Risk factors for mortality include urgent/
emergent status, age >50 years, functional classification of heart failure, and elevated pulmonary artery
pressures.[43]
Successful percutaneous balloon valvotomy has been reported when the annulus size and subvalvar
structures are normal.
Once the pathology is corrected, dietary and activity restrictions are no longer necessary and medications
may be weaned.
Congenital tricuspid stenosis (TS)
Infants with congenital TS often have incompletely developed cardiac valve leaflets, shortened
or malformed chordae, small annuli, abnormal size, and number of the papillary muscles, or any
combination of these defects. These patients usually have associated abnormalities of the pulmonary
valve as well. In the most severe cases, the entire right heart is underdeveloped and incapable of
handling an entire cardiac output.
The infant with congenital TS may require single ventricle palliation (with an initial systemic-to-pulmonary
artery shunt followed by a Fontan operation) or cardiac transplantation, plus preoperative prostaglandins
and postoperative antiplatelet therapy. Alprostadil is given preoperatively. Infants should have frequent
blood pressure checks and respiratory status should be monitored throughout treatment (e.g., continuous
pulse oximetry). The duration and choice of antiplatelet therapy varies by institution. However, the most
common protocol is to continue low-dose aspirin until the shunt is either taken down surgically or allowed
to thrombose over time as the patient grows.
18 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 19 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Management
TS with carcinoid heart disease
Right heart failure should be treated with fluid and sodium restriction and use of diuretics. Somatostatin
analogs (e.g., octreotide) have been shown to provide symptomatic improvement and improved
perioperative survival.[44]
Absolute and relative indications for intervention are not well established. Reviews have suggested that
early valve intervention has better results compared with waiting for advanced disease.[45] However,
early disease has not been clearly defined in the literature. Most authors support considering intervention
at the onset of any cardiac-related symptoms or with the development of right ventricular dysfunction.
Furthermore, expert guidelines recommend intervention in the following settings: severe TS (plus tricuspid
regurgitation) with symptoms despite medical therapy; and severe TS (plus tricuspid regurgitation) in a
patient undergoing left-sided valve intervention.[42]
Some case reports have demonstrated that percutaneous balloon tricuspid dilatation is safe and effective
for treating isolated severe TS in carcinoid heart disease.[46] However, the surgical approach is preferred
by most experts, especially when there is concomitant regurgitation. Bioprosthetic valves are preferred
and long-term results are promising.[47] [48] Concomitant replacement of affected pulmonary valves may
also result in less right ventricular dilatation.[49] Valve surgery for carcinoid heart disease is of higher
risk compared with most other forms of valve surgery; however, significant improvement in functional
class has been reported in those who survive the surgery. Long-term complications generally relate to the
tumor itself.[50]
TS with rheumatic fever sequelae
Mild to moderate disease:
• Medical therapy for symptomatic patients is targeted towards relief of systemic venous congestion
secondary to right heart failure and includes fluid and sodium restriction and diuretics to help
decrease symptoms and improve hepatic function.
Severe disease:
• Surgical valve repair or replacement are the primary options. Warfarin therapy may be advised
following either mechanical or bioprosthetic valve placement. Therefore, surgical repair is
preferable to valve replacement whenever feasible. Successful percutaneous balloon valvotomy
has been reported in some cases in which the annulus size and subvalvar structures were
normal.[43] [51] [52][53] [54]
• In rheumatic TS, the concomitant involvement of the mitral and aortic valve makes determining
absolute and relative indications for tricuspid valve surgery very difficult. Usually the mitral valve
is considered the most important valve to address as symptoms present much sooner and more
frequently when it is affected. However, studies have shown that patients who have combined mitral
and tricuspid valve repair have a better prognosis than those undergoing replacement of the mitral
valve alone.[32] [55] However, a limited retrospective study has shown patients did well whether
or not the tricuspid valve was surgically treated, or when treated they still had residual gradient.[3]
Because rheumatic heart disease has declined in developed countries, literature on the long-
term outcome of modern valve surgery for rheumatic disease is now scarce.[55] Evidence-based
recommendations are therefore lacking. As rheumatic tricuspid stenosis is frequently associated
with other valve lesions, indications for interventions should be based on symptoms and clinical
consequences (global hemodynamic burden) of the valve lesion(s) and their interactions.[32]
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
19
=== Page 20 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
TS with infective endocarditis
Absolute indications for surgery for right-sided endocarditis:
• Persistent bacteremia after 1 week of appropriate antibiotic therapy
• Right ventricular dysfunction secondary to severe tricuspid regurgitation not manageable with
diuretics
• Respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation with recurrent pulmonary emboli
• Involvement of left-sided heart structures
• Large residual vegetations (>20 mm) with recurrent pulmonary emboli.[2]
Relative indications for surgery:
• Persistent bacteremia despite appropriate antibiotic therapy, candidal endocarditis, and large
vegetations (>10 mm).
No indications for surgery:
• Appropriate antimicrobial therapy is initiated at the time of diagnosis, and further determined by the
sensitivity of the organisms cultured. Duration is usually 4-6 weeks.[2]
Treatment algorithm overview
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute ( summary )
congenital
1st surgery + preoperative alprostadil
plus postoperative antiplatelet therapy
with carcinoid heart disease
1st fluid and sodium restriction + loop diuretic
+ somatostatin analog + valve replacement
surgery or balloon dilatation
with rheumatic fever sequelae
mild to moderate disease 1st fluid and sodium restriction + loop diuretic
severe disease 1st surgical valve repair or replacement
with infective endocarditis
absolute indications for
surgery
1st appropriate antimicrobial therapy +
surgery
relative indications for
surgery
1st appropriate antimicrobial therapy +
surgery
no indications for
surgery
1st appropriate antimicrobial therapy
20 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 21 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
21
=== Page 22 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Treatment algorithm
Please note that formulations/routes and doses may differ between drug names and brands, drug
formularies, or locations. Treatment recommendations are specific to patient groups: see disclaimer
Acute
congenital
1st surgery + preoperative alprostadil
Primary options
» alprostadil: neonates: 0.05 to 0.1
micrograms/kg/minute intravenous infusion
initially, adjust according to response, usual
maintenance dose 0.01 to 0.4 micrograms/kg/
minute until surgery
» This represents a wide spectrum of disease
that usually presents in early infancy due to
cyanosis and right heart failure with ductal-
dependent pulmonary blood flow (requiring
continuous prostaglandin therapy to maintain
ductal patency).
» Infants may require single ventricle palliation
(initial systemic-to-pulmonary artery shunt,
second-stage hemi-Fontan or bidirectional Glenn
procedure, and third-stage Fontan operation) or
cardiac transplantation.
» Alprostadil is given preoperatively. Infants
should have frequent blood pressure checks
and respiratory status should be monitored
throughout treatment (e.g., continuous pulse
oximetry).
plus postoperative antiplatelet therapy
Treatment recommended for ALL patients in
selected patient group
Primary options
» aspirin: neonates: 5-10 mg/kg/day orally
» Aspirin is given postoperatively as an
antiplatelet agent. The duration and choice
of antiplatelet therapy varies by institution.
However, the most common protocol is to
continue low-dose aspirin until the shunt is either
taken down surgically or allowed to thrombose
over time as the patient grows.
with carcinoid heart disease
1st fluid and sodium restriction + loop diuretic
+ somatostatin analog + valve replacement
surgery or balloon dilatation
22 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 23 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Management
Acute
Primary options
» furosemide: adults: 20-80 mg orally every
6-24 hours, maximum 600 mg/day
-and-
» octreotide: adults: 100-600 micrograms/day
subcutaneously given in 2-4 divided doses for
2 weeks, followed by 150 micrograms 3 times
daily
» Fluid and sodium restriction as well as the use
of diuretics treat right heart failure.
» Somatostatin analogs (e.g., octreotide)
have been shown to provide symptomatic
improvement and improved perioperative
survival.[44]
» Percutaneous balloon tricuspid dilatation is
safe and effective for treating isolated severe
TS in carcinoid heart disease and should be
considered in those who are not operative
candidates.[46]
» Bioprosthetic valves are preferred and long-
term results are promising.[47] [48] Concomitant
replacement of affected pulmonary valves may
also result in less right ventricular dilatation.[49]
» Tricuspid valve repair is usually not feasible as
the leaflets are so restricted that residual post-
repair stenosis is highly likely.
with rheumatic fever sequelae
mild to moderate disease 1st fluid and sodium restriction + loop diuretic
Primary options
» furosemide: adults: 20-80 mg orally every
6-24 hours, maximum 600 mg/day
» Mild rheumatic tricuspid valve disease is
usually asymptomatic and no specific therapy is
indicated.
» However, patients with more significant
stenosis (or associated mitral and/or aortic valve
disease) may present with symptoms of right
heart failure (i.e., fatigue, dyspnea, abdominal
discomfort, and swelling).
» Initial medical therapy for symptomatic patients
is targeted towards relief of systemic venous
congestion and includes fluid and sodium
restriction and diuretics to help decrease
symptoms and improve hepatic function.
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
23
=== Page 24 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Acute
severe disease 1st surgical valve repair or replacement
» Severe rheumatic tricuspid valve disease is
characterized by intractable right heart failure
or low cardiac output that usually takes years to
develop following the initial illness. In order to
relieve symptoms and signs of right heart failure
and diminished pulmonary blood flow due to
obstruction to right ventricular inflow, surgical
valve repair, or replacement are the primary
options.
» With tricuspid valve replacement, the risk of
thrombosis is significant and many clinicians
advise warfarin therapy following either
mechanical or bioprosthetic valve placement.
Therefore, surgical repair is preferable to valve
replacement whenever feasible.[43] [53]
» When the annulus size and subvalvar
structures are normal, successful percutaneous
balloon valvotomy has been reported.[51]
[52] [54] The major adverse effect of balloon
valvotomy is tricuspid regurgitation that may
progress over time and ultimately require valve
replacement.[32]
with infective endocarditis
absolute indications for
surgery
1st appropriate antimicrobial therapy +
surgery
» Absolute indications for tricuspid valve surgery
include persistent bacteremia after appropriate
antibiotic therapy for 1 week, right ventricular
dysfunction secondary to severe tricuspid
regurgitation, respiratory failure after recurrent
pulmonary emboli, involvement of left-sided
heart structures, large vegetations with recurrent
pulmonary emboli.[2]
» Surgery typically involves a midline
sternotomy approach, central catheterization
for cardiopulmonary bypass, and tricuspid
valve replacement (with a bioprosthetic or
mechanical valve) in a beating or arrested
heart depending on the preference of the
surgeon. Many clinicians advise warfarin therapy
following either mechanical or bioprosthetic valve
placement.
» Appropriate antimicrobial therapy according
to latest treatment guidelines is initiated at the
time of diagnosis, and appropriate antibiotic
or antifungal therapy is determined by the
sensitivity of the organisms cultured. Effective
therapy generally requires 4 to 6 weeks of
24 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 25 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Management
Acute
appropriate intravenous therapy. For certain
organisms, synergy and increased efficacy may
be achieved with a second antibiotic for the first
2 weeks of therapy. See Infective endocarditis .
relative indications for
surgery
1st appropriate antimicrobial therapy +
surgery
» Relative indications for surgery include
persistent bacteremia despite appropriate
antibiotic therapy, candidal endocarditis, and
large vegetations (>10 mm).
» Surgery typically involves a midline
sternotomy approach, central catheterization
for cardiopulmonary bypass, and tricuspid
valve replacement (with a bioprosthetic or
mechanical valve) in a beating or arrested
heart depending on the preference of the
surgeon. Many clinicians advise warfarin therapy
following either mechanical or bioprosthetic valve
placement.
» Appropriate antimicrobial therapy according
to latest treatment guidelines is initiated at the
time of diagnosis and appropriate antibiotic
or antifungal therapy is determined by the
sensitivity of the organisms cultured. Effective
therapy generally requires 4 to 6 weeks of
appropriate intravenous therapy. For certain
organisms, synergy and increased efficacy may
be achieved with a second antibiotic for the first
2 weeks of therapy. See Infective endocarditis .
no indications for surgery 1st appropriate antimicrobial therapy
» Infective endocarditis can affect both
structurally normal and abnormal tricuspid
valves.
» Appropriate antimicrobial therapy according
to latest treatment guidelines is initiated at the
time of diagnosis, and appropriate antibiotic
or antifungal therapy is determined by the
sensitivity of the organisms cultured.
» Effective therapy generally requires 4 to 6
weeks of appropriate intravenous therapy. For
certain organisms, synergy and increased
efficacy may be achieved with a second
antibiotic for the first 2 weeks of therapy. See
Infective endocarditis .
MANAGEMENT
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
25
=== Page 26 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Management
MANAGEMENT
Emerging
Transcatheter tricuspid valve replacement
In patients who have undergone prior tricuspid valve replacement with a bioprosthetic valve (BPV) or tissue
valve, eventual valve failure is inevitable. For high-risk operative patients, transcatheter tricuspid valve-
in-valve (TVIV) replacement is now becoming a common intervention with either the Medtronic Melody™
transcatheter pulmonary valve or the Edwards SAPIEN™ Transcatheter Heart Valve (THV).[56] [57] [58]
[59] More trials are underway that will help to evaluate the effects of transcatheter TV therapies on clinical
outcomes.[36] The framework of the previously placed BPV provides a landing zone for the transcatheter
valve, which allows the interventional cardiologist to implant a new functional valve within the orifice of the
old dysfunctional valve with a much lower risk than if a redo sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass were
required.[60] [61]
Primary prevention
Primary prevention of rheumatic tricuspid stenosis includes prompt and complete antibiotic therapy in
symptomatic patients with suspected group A streptococcal pharyngitis.[6][25] [26] Similarly, in patients with
a documented history of acute rheumatic fever, secondary prevention or prophylaxis with long-term antibiotic
therapy should be instituted following existing guidelines and recommendations.[6][25]
Secondary prevention
Endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended for all patients with prosthetic cardiac valves undergoing dental
procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the periapical region of teeth or perforation of the
oral mucosa.[2]
Patient discussions
If a patient with a prosthetic cardiac valve is due to undergo a dental procedure, this should be discussed
with the dentist and physician to ensure antibiotic prophylaxis is administered if required. Patients are
encouraged to lead an active lifestyle and exercise regularly under the supervision of their primary
physician or cardiologist. Even in the absence of significant residual disease, exercise tolerance may be
limited. Each patient should be encouraged to rest as needed during any exertional activity if worsening
symptoms develop.
26 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 27 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Follow up
Monitoring
Monitoring
ECGs, chest x-rays, and echocardiograms should be performed annually to monitor for development or
worsening of tricuspid stenosis and/or regurgitation.
Patients not requiring surgery should have a follow-up visit with a cardiologist annually.
Patients who underwent tricuspid surgery are typically seen in an outpatient cardiology clinic at 2 to 4
weeks after hospital discharge, at 6 months and annually thereafter. For patients with mechanical valve
prostheses, warfarin dosing is adjusted on an outpatient basis according to the international normalized
ratio (INR).
Endocarditis prophylaxis is recommended for all patients with prosthetic cardiac valves undergoing dental
procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the periapical region of teeth or perforation of
the oral mucosa.
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
27
=== Page 28 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Follow up
FOLLOW UP
Complications
Complications Timeframe Likelihood
surgical complications short term low
Postoperative complications following tricuspid valve repair or replacement include pneumothorax,
hemothorax, pericardial tamponade and arrhythmias (including third-degree atrioventricular block).
Appropriate therapy for pneumothorax or hemothorax is placement of a chest tube.
Pericardial tamponade is relieved by reopening the chest and evacuating blood and thrombus.
Arrhythmias are treated with appropriate antiarrhythmic medications and third-degree atrioventricular block
is treated with atrioventricular synchronous pacing using temporary atrial and ventricular pacing wires
(placed intraoperatively).
bacterial endocarditis variable low
Dysplastic valves and prosthetic valves are prone to endocarditis (particularly associated with high-risk
dental procedures).
If a patient develops endocarditis, appropriate antimicrobial therapy should be instituted immediately and
continued for a full 6-week course.[2]
prosthetic valve failure variable low
Mechanical valves may fail due to thrombosis. In order to prevent this complication, patients are treated
with anticoagulant therapy (e.g., warfarin).[53]
If a mechanical valve fails in the closed position, the patient will present with signs and symptoms of acute,
severe tricuspid stenosis (TS). If the valve fails in the open position, the patient will present with signs and
symptoms of acute, severe tricuspid regurgitation.
Bioprosthetic valves may fail due to progressive calcification and patients may develop signs and
symptoms of either TS or regurgitation.
Prognosis
Mild to moderate (asymptomatic) tricuspid stenosis
In the absence of progression to severe disease, prognosis is good. Isolated mild to moderate tricuspid
stenosis (TS) is well tolerated and rarely requires intervention. Progression to severe TS is common in
patients with carcinoid heart disease if the malignancy is not treated. The frequency of progression to severe
TS in rheumatic valve disease is variable. Regardless of the etiology, a follow-up visit with a cardiologist is
recommended annually.
28 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 29 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Follow up
Severe (symptomatic) tricuspid stenosis
Once symptoms occur, medical therapy is instituted and valve intervention is considered. For most, surgery
(valve repair or replacement) will be the most likely treatment option offered. Perioperative mortality related
to valve repair and replacement continues to be relatively high in the carcinoid group despite significant
improvements in surgical and anesthetic techniques. Studies have demonstrated perioperative mortality
ranging from 9% to 20%.[63] [64] Right ventricular dilatation, systolic dysfunction, and advanced New York
Heart Association (NYHA) class have been implicated in those who suffered poor perioperative outcomes.
Perioperative mortality with valve replacement in patients with TS secondary to other causes is much lower,
likely due to a decreased incidence of coexisting tricuspid regurgitation and right ventricular dilatation.
Following successful tricuspid valve repair or replacement, symptoms of right heart failure will generally
subside within 6 months and the overall prognosis for these patients is very good. Heart failure is the
predominant cause of early and late deaths, emphasizing the importance of timely referral before the
development of end-stage cardiac disease.[43]
Long-term survival for tricuspid valve replacement in carcinoid heart disease has been reported to be as
high as 100% at median follow-up of 37 months.[64] Other studies reporting results of valve replacement for
various acquired heart conditions have shown only modest results with 50% survival at 10 and 15 years.[43]
[47] [63] [64]
FOLLOW UP
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
29
=== Page 30 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Guidelines
GUIDELINES
Diagnostic guidelines
International
2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation
and diagnosis of chest pain (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-
statements/guidelines-and-statements-search)   [40]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association
Last published: 2021
2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patients with valvular heart
disease (https://www.acc.org/guidelines)   [41]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association
Last published: 2021
Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management
of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 update (https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23091044)   [26]
Published by: Infectious Diseases Society of America Last published: 2012
2023 ESC guidelines for the management of endocarditis (https://
doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehad193)   [2]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2023
2021 ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease
(https://www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [42]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2021
30 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 31 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Guidelines
Treatment guidelines
International
The tricuspid valve: a review of pathology, imaging and current treatment
options: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association (https://
www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001232)   [36]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2024
2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the management of patients with valvular heart
disease (https://www.acc.org/guidelines)   [41]
Published by: American College of Cardiology; American Heart
Association
Last published: 2021
Clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis and management
of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 update (https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23091044)   [26]
Published by: Infectious Diseases Society of America Last published: 2012
Prevention of rheumatic fever and diagnosis and treatment of acute
streptococcal pharyngitis (https://professional.heart.org/en/guidelines-and-
statements)   [62]
Published by: American Heart Association Last published: 2009
2023 ESC guidelines for the management of endocarditis (https://
doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehad193)   [2]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2023
2021 ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease
(https://www.escardio.org/Guidelines/Clinical-Practice-Guidelines)   [42]
Published by: European Society of Cardiology Last published: 2021
GUIDELINES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
31
=== Page 32 ===
Tricuspid stenosis References
REFERENCES
Key articles
• WHO guideline on the prevention and diagnosis of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease
[Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2024.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK609707)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/39631006?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
• Vahanian A, Beyersdorf F, Praz F, et al. 2021 ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular
heart disease. EuroIntervention. 2022 Feb 4;17(14):e1126-96.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.4244/
EIJ-E-21-00009)
• Writing Committee Members., Otto CM, Nishimura RA, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the
management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021
Feb 2;77(4):e25-e197.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.11.018)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33342586?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
References
1. Andreas M, Burri H, Praz F, et al. Tricuspid valve disease and cardiac implantable electronic devices.
Eur Heart J. 2024 Feb 1;45(5):346-65.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehad783)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38096587?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
2. Delgado V, Ajmone Marsan N, de Waha S, et al. 2023 ESC guidelines for the management of
endocarditis. Eur Heart J. 2023 Oct 14;44(39):3948-4042.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1093/
eurheartj/ehad193)
3. Roguin A, Rinkevich D, Milo S, et al. Long-term follow-up of patients with severe rheumatic tricuspid
stenosis. Am Heart J. 1998 Jul;136(1):103-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9665226?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
4. Diker E, Aydogdu S, Ozdemir M, et al. Prevalence and predictors of atrial fibrillation in rheumatic
valvular heart disease. Am J Cardiol. 1996 Jan 1;77(1):96-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/8540469?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
5. El-Sherif N. Rheumatic tricuspid stenosis: a haemodynamic correlation. Br Heart J. 1971
Jan;33(1):16-31.  Full text (http://heart.bmj.com/content/heartjnl/33/1/16.full.pdf)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/5100362?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
6. WHO guideline on the prevention and diagnosis of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease
[Internet]. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2024.  Full text (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK609707)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/39631006?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
7. Watkins DA, Johnson CO, Colquhoun SM, et al. Global, regional, and national burden of
rheumatic heart disease, 1990-2015. N Engl J Med. 2017 Aug 24;377(8):713-22.  Full text (https://
32 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 33 ===
Tricuspid stenosis References
www.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1603693)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28834488?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
8. Horstkotte D, Niehues R, Strauer BE. Pathomorphological aspects, aetiology and natural history
of acquired mitral valve stenosis. Eur Heart J. 1991 Jul;12 Suppl B:55-60. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1936027?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
9. Majeed HA, Batnager S, Yousof AM, et al. Acute rheumatic fever and the evolution of rheumatic heart
disease: a prospective 12 year follow-up report. J Clin Epidemiol. 1992 Aug;45(8):871-5. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1624969?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
10. Hauck AJ, Freeman DP, Ackermann DM, et al. Surgical pathology of the tricuspid valve: a study
of 363 cases spanning 25 years. Mayo Clin Proc. 1988 Sep;63(9):851-63. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3045434?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
11. Raman SV, Sparks EA, Boudoulas H, et al. Tricuspid valve disease: tricuspid valve complex
perspective. Curr Probl Cardiol. 2002 Mar;27(3):103-42. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11979238?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
12. Essop MR, Nkomo VT. Rheumatic and nonrheumatic valvular heart disease: epidemiology,
management, and prevention in Africa. Circulation. 2005 Dec 6;112(23):3584-91.  Full text
(http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/112/23/3584.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16330700?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
13. Goswami KC, Rao MB, Dev V, et al. Juvenile tricuspid stenosis and rheumatic tricuspid valve
disease: an echocardiographic study. Int J Cardiol. 1999 Dec 15;72(1):83-6. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10636636?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
14. Yousof AM, Shafei MZ, Endrys G, et al. Tricuspid stenosis and regurgitation in rheumatic heart
disease: a prospective cardiac catheterization study in 525 patients. Am Heart J. 1985 Jul;110(1 Pt
1):60-4. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4013991?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
15. Kitchin A, Turner R. Diagnosis and treatment of tricuspid stenosis. Br Heart J. 1964 May;26:354-79. 
Full text (http://heart.bmj.com/content/heartjnl/26/3/354.full.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/14156086?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
16. Lawrence JG, Carapetis JR, Griffiths K, et al. Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease:
incidence and progression in the Northern Territory of Australia, 1997 to 2010. Circulation. 2013 Jul
30;128(5):492-501.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.001477)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23794730?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
17. Sultan FA, Moustafa SE, Tajik J, et al. Rheumatic tricuspid valve disease: an evidence-based
systematic overview. J Heart Valve Dis. 2010 May;19(3):374-82. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/20583402?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
18. Fox DJ, Khattar RS. Carcinoid heart disease: presentation, diagnosis, and management.
Heart. 2004 Oct;90(10):1224-8. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15367531?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
33
=== Page 34 ===
Tricuspid stenosis References
REFERENCES
19. Davar J, Connolly HM, Caplin ME, et al. Diagnosing and managing carcinoid heart disease in patients
with neuroendocrine tumors: an expert statement. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017 Mar 14;69(10):1288-304. 
Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2016.12.030)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28279296?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
20. Cunningham MW. Rheumatic fever, autoimmunity, and molecular mimicry: the streptococcal
connection. Int Rev Immunol. 2014 Jul-Aug;33(4):314-29.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
articles/PMC4669348)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24892819?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
21. Reichek N, Shelburne JC, Perloff JK. Clinical aspects of rheumatic valvular disease. Prog Cardiovasc
Dis. 1973 Mar-Apr;15(5):491-537. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/4571260?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
22. Stevens D, Kaplan E. Streptococcal infections. Clinical aspects, microbiology and molecular
pathogenesis. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2000:102-32.
23. Kaplan EL, Wotton JT, Johnson DR. Dynamic epidemiology of group A streptococcal
serotypes associated with pharyngitis. Lancet. 2001 Oct 20;358(9290):1334-7. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11684215?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
24. Bisno AL, Brito MO, Collins CM. Molecular basis of group A streptococcal virulence. Lancet
Infect Dis. 2003 Apr;3(4):191-200. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12679262?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
25. Dajani A, Taubert K, Ferrieri P, et al. Treatment of acute streptococcal pharyngitis and prevention of
rheumatic fever: a statement for health professionals. Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis,
and Kawasaki Disease of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, the American
Heart Association. Pediatrics. 1995 Oct;96(4 Pt 1):758-64. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/7567345?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
26. Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al; Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clinical practice
guideline for the diagnosis and management of group A streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 update by
the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2012 Nov 15;55(10):e86-102.  Full text
(https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/55/10/e86/321183)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/22965026?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
27. Coffey S, Rayner J, Newton J, et al. Right-sided valve disease. Int J Clin Pract. 2014
Oct;68(10):1221-6.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1111/ijcp.12485)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25269950?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
28. Carapetis JR, Beaton A, Cunningham MW, et al. Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart
disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 Jan 14;2:15084.  Full text (https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/
PMC5810582)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27188830?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
29. Khalique OK, Cavalcante JL, Shah D, et al. Multimodality imaging of the tricuspid valve and
right heart anatomy. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019 Mar;12(3):516-31.  Full text (https://
34 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 35 ===
Tricuspid stenosis References
www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmg.2019.01.006)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30846125?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
30. Oh JK, Tajik AJ, Seward JB. The echo manual. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2006.
31. Baumgartner H, Hung J, Bermejo J, et al; American Society of Echocardiography, European
Association of Echocardiography. Echocardiographic assessment of valve stenosis: EAE/ASE
recommendations for clinical practice. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2009 Jan;22(1):1-23. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19130998?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
32. Vahanian A, Beyersdorf F, Praz F, et al. 2021 ESC/EACTS guidelines for the management of valvular
heart disease. EuroIntervention. 2022 Feb 4;17(14):e1126-96.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.4244/
EIJ-E-21-00009)
33. British Society of Echocardiography. Echocardiography: valve disease assessment. Mar 2022 [internet
publication].  Full text (https://www.bsecho.org/common/Uploaded%20files/Education/Posters/
PUA006-Valve-disease-assessment-poster_print-ready.pdf)
34. Sandmann H, Pakkal M, Steeds R. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging in the assessment
of carcinoid heart disease. Clin Radiol. 2009 Aug;64(8):761-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19589414?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
35. Bhattacharyya S, Toumpanakis C, Burke M, et al. Features of carcinoid heart disease identified by
two- and three-dimensional echocardiography and cardiac MRI. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2010
Jan;3(1):103-11. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19920029?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36. Davidson LJ, Tang GHL, Ho EC, et al. The tricuspid valve: a review of pathology, imaging, and current
treatment options: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2024 May
28;149(22):e1223-38.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001232)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/38660790?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
37. Perloff PK, Harvey WP. Clinical recognition of tricuspid stenosis. Circulation. 1960 Sep;22:346-64.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/13734436?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38. Fawzy ME, Mercer EN, Dunn B, et al. Doppler echocardiography in the evaluation of tricuspid
stenosis. Eur Heart J. 1989 Nov;10(11):985-90. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/2591399?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
39. Ha JW, Chung N, Jang Yet al. Tricuspid stenosis and regurgitation: Doppler and color flow
echocardiography and cardiac catheterization findings. Clin Cardiol. 2000 Jan;23(1):51-2. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10680030?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
40. Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR Guideline
for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021 Nov
30;144(22):e368-e454.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34709879?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
35
=== Page 36 ===
Tricuspid stenosis References
REFERENCES
41. Writing Committee Members., Otto CM, Nishimura RA, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the
management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021
Feb 2;77(4):e25-e197.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2020.11.018)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33342586?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
42. Vahanian A, Beyersdorf F, Praz F, et al. 2021 ESC/EACTS Guidelines for the management
of valvular heart disease. Eur Heart J. 28 Aug 2021 [Epub ahead of print].  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehab395)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/34453165?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
43. Filsoufi F, Anyanwu AC, Salzberg SP, et al. Long-term outcomes of tricuspid valve
replacement in the current era. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005 Sep;80(3):845-50.  Full text (https://
www.annalsthoracicsurgery.org/article/S0003-4975(04)02464-6/fulltext)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16122441?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
44. Marsh H, Martin K, Kvols L, et al. Carcinoid crises during anesthesia: successful treatment with a
somatostatin analogue. Anesthesiology. 1987 Jan;66(1):89-91. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/2432806?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
45. Bhattacharyya S, Davar J, Dreyfus G, et al. Carcinoid heart disease. Circulation. 2007
Dec 11;116(24):2860-5. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18071089?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
46. Oñate A, Alcibar J, Inguanzo R, et al. Balloon dilation of tricuspid and pulmonary valves in carcinoid
heart disease. Tex Heart Inst J. 1993;20(2):115-9.  Full text (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC325073/pdf/thij00041-0053.pdf)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8334362?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
47. Scully HE, Armstrong CS. Tricuspid valve replacement. Fifteen years of experience with mechanical
prostheses and bioprostheses. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1995 Jun;109(6):1035-41. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7776666?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
48. Connolly HM, Nishimura RA, Smith HC, et al. Outcome of cardiac surgery for carcinoid heart disease.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995 Feb;25(2):410-6. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7829795?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
49. Connolly HM, Schaff HV, Mullany CJ, et al. Carcinoid heart disease: impact of pulmonary valve
replacement in right ventricular function and remodeling. Circulation. 2002 Sep 24;106(12 Suppl
1):I51-6.  Full text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/106/12_suppl_1/I-51.full)   Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12354709?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
50. Bhattacharyya S, Raja SG, Toumpanakis C, et al. Outcomes, risks and complications of cardiac
surgery for carcinoid heart disease. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2011 Jul;40(1):168-72.  Full text
(https://academic.oup.com/ejcts/article/40/1/168/600451)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/21156347?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
36 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 37 ===
Tricuspid stenosis References
51. Sancaktar O, Kumbasar SD, Semiz E, et al. Late results of combined percutaneous balloon
valvuloplasty of mitral and tricuspid valves. Cathet Cardiovasc Diagn. 1998 Nov;45(3):246-50. Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9829880?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
52. Ribeiro PA, al Zaibag M, Idris MT. Percutaneous double balloon tricuspid valvotomy for severe
tricuspid stenosis: 3-year follow-up study. Eur Heart J. 1990 Dec;11(12):1109-12. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2292258?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
53. Cheng A, Malkin C, Briffa NP. Antithrombotic therapy after heart valve intervention: review of
mechanisms, evidence and current guidance. Heart. 2023 Dec 20;110(2):87-93. Abstract (http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/37438054?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
54. Yeter E, Ozlem K, Kiliç H, et al. Tricuspid balloon valvuloplasty to treat tricuspid stenosis. J Heart Valve
Dis. 2010 Jan;19(1):159-60.
55. Bernal JM, Pontón A, Diaz B, et al. Combined mitral and tricuspid valve repair in rheumatic
valve disease: fewer reoperations with prosthetic ring annuloplasty. Circulation. 2010 May
4;121(17):1934-40.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.894873)   Abstract
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20404254?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
56. Tzifa A, Momenah T, Al Sahari A, et al. Transcatheter valve-in-valve implantation in the tricuspid
position. EuroIntervention. 2014 Dec;10(8):995-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/24755248?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
57. Hoendermis ES, Douglas YL, van den Heuvel AF. Percutaneous Edwards SAPIEN valve implantation
in the tricuspid position: case report and review of literature. EuroIntervention. 2012 Sep;8(5):628-33.
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22995090?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
58. Sorajja P, Whisenant B, Hamid N, et al. Transcatheter repair for patients with tricuspid regurgitation. N
Engl J Med. 2023 May 18;388(20):1833-42.  Full text (https://www.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2300525)  
Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/36876753?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
59. Sala A, Hahn RT, Kodali SK, et al. Tricuspid valve regurgitation: current understanding and novel
treatment options. J Soc Cardiovasc Angiogr Interv. 2023 Sep-Oct;2(5):101041.  Full text (https://
www.doi.org/10.1016/j.jscai.2023.101041)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/39132395?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
60. Cullen MW, Cabalka AK, Alli OO, et al. Transvenous, antegrade Melody valve-in-valve implantation
for bioprosthetic mitral and tricuspid valve dysfunction: a case series in children and adults. JACC
Cardiovasc Interv. 2013 Jun;6(6):598-605. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23683739?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
61. Roberts PA, Boudjemline Y, Cheatham JP, et al. Percutaneous tricuspid valve replacement in
congenital and acquired heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011 Jul 5;58(2):117-22.  Full text (http://
www.onlinejacc.org/content/58/2/117)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21718905?
tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
62. Gerber MA, Baltimore RS, Eaton CB, et al. Prevention of rheumatic fever and diagnosis and
treatment of acute Streptococcal pharyngitis. Circulation. 2009 Mar 24;119(11):1541-51.  Full
REFERENCES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
37
=== Page 38 ===
Tricuspid stenosis References
REFERENCES
text (http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/119/11/1541.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/19246689?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
63. Møller JE, Pellikka PA, Bernheim AM, et al. Prognosis of carcinoid heart disease: analysis
of 200 cases over two decades. Circulation. 2005 Nov 22;112(21):3320-7.  Full text (http://
circ.ahajournals.org/content/112/21/3320.full)   Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/16286584?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
64. Castillo JG, Filsoufi F, Rahmanian PB, et al. Early and late results of valvular surgery for carcinoid
heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008 Apr 15;51(15):1507-9. Abstract (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/18402908?tool=bestpractice.bmj.com)
38 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 39 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Images
Images
Figure 1: Congenital tricuspid valve stenosis: 2D transthoracic echocardiogram apical 4 chamber view reveals
a small tricuspid valve annulus (dash), RV hypoplasia, and a large atrial septal defect (ASD, arrow)
From the personal collection of Martin Bocks; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
39
=== Page 40 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Images
IMAGES
Figure 2: Hemodynamic tracings obtained during cardiac catheterization from a woman with moderate to
severe rheumatic tricuspid valve stenosis
From the personal collection of Martin Bocks; used with permission
40 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 41 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Images
Figure 3: Echocardiogram with color Doppler reveals flow acceleration across the tricuspid valve and spectral
Doppler reveals a mean TV gradient of 6 mmHg
From the personal collection of Martin Bocks; used with permission
IMAGES
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
41
=== Page 42 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Disclaimer
DISCLAIMER
Disclaimer
BMJ Best Practice is intended for licensed medical professionals. BMJ Publishing Group Ltd (BMJ) does not
advocate or endorse the use of any drug or therapy contained within this publication nor does it diagnose
patients. As a medical professional you retain full responsibility for the care and treatment of your patients
and you should use your own clinical judgement and expertise when using this product.
This content is not intended to cover all possible diagnosis methods, treatments, follow up, drugs and any
contraindications or side effects. In addition, since such standards and practices in medicine change as
new data become available, you should consult a variety of sources. We strongly recommend that you
independently verify specified diagnosis, treatments and follow-up and ensure it is appropriate for your
patient within your region. In addition, with respect to prescription medication, you are advised to check the
product information sheet accompanying each drug to verify conditions of use and identify any changes in
dosage schedule or contraindications, particularly if the drug to be administered is new, infrequently used, or
has a narrow therapeutic range. You must always check that drugs referenced are licensed for the specified
use and at the specified doses in your region.
Information included in BMJ Best Practice is provided on an “as is” basis without any representations,
conditions or warranties that it is accurate and up to date. BMJ and its licensors and licensees assume no
responsibility for any aspect of treatment administered to any patients with the aid of this information. To
the fullest extent permitted by law, BMJ and its licensors and licensees shall not incur any liability, including
without limitation, liability for damages, arising from the content. All conditions, warranties and other terms
which might otherwise be implied by the law including, without limitation, the warranties of satisfactory
quality, fitness for a particular purpose, use of reasonable care and skill and non-infringement of proprietary
rights are excluded.
Where BMJ Best Practice has been translated into a language other than English, BMJ does not warrant the
accuracy and reliability of the translations or the content provided by third parties (including but not limited to
local regulations, clinical guidelines, terminology, drug names and drug dosages). BMJ is not responsible for
any errors and omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise.Where BMJ Best Practice lists
drug names, it does so by recommended International Nonproprietary Names (rINNs) only. It is possible that
certain drug formularies might refer to the same drugs using different names.
Please note that recommended formulations and doses may differ between drug databases drug names and
brands, drug formularies, or locations. A local drug formulary should always be consulted for full prescribing
information.
Treatment recommendations in BMJ Best Practice are specific to patient groups. Care is advised when
selecting the integrated drug formulary as some treatment recommendations are for adults only, and external
links to a paediatric formulary do not necessarily advocate use in children (and vice-versa). Always check
that you have selected the correct drug formulary for your patient.
Where your version of BMJ Best Practice does not integrate with a local drug formulary, you should consult
a local pharmaceutical database for comprehensive drug information including contraindications, drug
interactions, and alternative dosing before prescribing.
Interpretation of numbers
Regardless of the language in which the content is displayed, numerals are displayed according to the
original English-language numerical separator standard. For example 4 digit numbers shall not include a
comma nor a decimal point; numbers of 5 or more digits shall include commas; and numbers stated to be
less than 1 shall be depicted using decimal points. See Figure 1 below for an explanatory table.
BMJ accepts no responsibility for misinterpretation of numbers which comply with this stated numerical
separator standard.
This approach is in line with the guidance of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures Service.
Figure 1 – BMJ Best Practice Numeral Style
42 This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
=== Page 43 ===
Tricuspid stenosis Disclaimer
5-digit numerals: 10,000
4-digit numerals: 1000
numerals < 1: 0.25
Our full website and application terms and conditions can be found here: Website Terms and Conditions.
Contact us
+ 44 (0) 207 111 1105
support@bmj.com
BMJ
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR
UK
DISCLAIMER
This PDF of the BMJ Best Practice topic is based on the web version that was last updated: Apr 02, 2025.
BMJ Best Practice topics are regularly updated and the most recent version of the topics
can be found on bestpractice.bmj.com . Use of this content is subject to our disclaimer (.
Use of this content is subject to our) . © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2025. All rights reserved.
43
=== Page 44 ===
Contributors:
// Authors:
John R. Charpie, MD, PhD
Professor
Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, Division Director, Pediatric Cardiology, Medical Director, Pediatric
Cardiothoracic ICU, University of Michigan Congenital Heart Center, Ann Arbor, MI
DISCLOSURES: JRC declares that he has no competing interests.
Jeffrey D. Zampi, MD
Associate Professor
Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, Director, Interventional Pediatric Cardiology, University of Michigan
Congenital Heart Center, Ann Arbor, MI
DISCLOSURES: JZ is a consultant for Medtronic Inc and Gore Medical. JZ serves on the data safety
monitoring board for a clinical trial sponsored by Encore Medical. JZ has served as medical expert for
several legal cases.
Amanda D. McCormick MD,
Assistant Professor
Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan Congenital Heart Center, Ann Arbor, MI
DISCLOSURES: ADM receives grant funding from the NIH.
// Acknowledgements:
Dr John R. Charpie, Dr Jeffrey D. Zampi, and Dr Amanda D. McCormick would like to gratefully
acknowledge Dr Martin L. Bocks, a previous contributor to this topic.
DISCLOSURES: MLB declares that he has no competing interests.
// Peer Reviewers:
Lokesh Tejwani, MD, FACC
Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine
University of Missouri Hospitals and Clinics, Harry S. Truman VA Hospital, Columbia, MO
DISCLOSURES: LT declares that he has no competing interests.
John Coltart, MD, FRCP, FACC, FESC, MRCS
Consultant Cardiologist
Cardio-thoracic Unit, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital, London, UK
DISCLOSURES: JC declares that he has no competing interests.
